4 Foreword  
Part A - Context  and Strategic  Policies 
5 1 Introduction  and Context  
11 2 Key Issues  and Challenges  
17 3 Vision  for the Area  in 2036  
23 4 Core  Policies  Introduction  
24 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy  
41 6 Strategic  Green  Belt Review  
47 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live 
63 8 Health  and Wellbeing  
68 9 A Good  Place  to do Business  
75 10 A Unique  Place  
76 Design  and Local  Distinctiveness  
78 Historic  Environment  
81 Landscape  Character  
83 Biodiversity  and Geodiversity  
90 Regenerating  the Waterways  
91 11 Strategic  Infrastructure  
93 12 Transport  and Accessibility  
103 13 Green  Infrastructure  
107 14 Water Management  
114 15 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 
122 16 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy  
Key Diagram 
130 Key Diagram  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) Contents Part B - Development  Management  Policies 
131 17 Development  Management  Introduction  
132 18 A Desirable  Place  to Live 
137 19 Providing  Accommodation  for Gypsies,  Travellers  and Travelling  Showpeople 
138 20 Community  Facilities  
145 21 Employment  Land  
152 22 Town Centre  Development  and Retail  
161 23 Sustainable  Tourism  
169 24 Safeguarding  the Green  Belt 
171 25 Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment  
173 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness  
185 27 Rural  Development  
Part C - Site Allocations 
190 28 Site Allocations  Introduction  
192 29 Strategic  Allocation  Lea Castle  Village  
196 30 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension  
202 31 Strategic  Allocations  Blakedown  
206 32 Kidderminster  Town 
235 33 Stourport-on-Severn  
257 34 Bewdley  
264 35 Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 
268 36 Rural  Wyre Forest  
Part D - Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework 
279 37 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) Contents Appendices 
287 a List of Strategic  Policies  
289 b Supplementary  Planning  Documents  (SPDs)  
290 c Glossary  
297 d Maps  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) Contents Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan  – Foreword 
Welcome  to the Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan.   The Local  Plan sets out how the district  will 
accommodate  its housing  and employment  needs  up to 2036.  This Local  Plan replaces  the 
previously  adopted  local plans  for the district.   
The process  of reviewing  the Local  Plan began  in 2015  when  the Council  consulted  on the 
broad  Issues  and Options;  this was followed  by the Preferred  Options  consultation  held in 
2017.  The Pre- Submission  version  of the Local  Plan was consulted  on in 2018  and 2019.The 
Council  submitted  the Local  Plan to the Secretary  of State  in April 2020  for the purposes  of the 
Examination  in Public  of the Local  Plan review . This adopted  Local  Plan has been  produced  in 
accordance  with the Government’ s National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (2021),  which  requires 
Councils  to plan positively  for a period  of at least  15 years  for development  in its area and 
particularly  to meet  the objectively  assessed  need  for market  and affordable  housing. 
Wyre Forest  District  Council  believes  that to have  an up-to-date  adopted  Local  Plan is essential 
in order  to successfully  plan for development  to go where  we want  it and to enable  the Council 
to make  good  decisions  on planning  applications. 
  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 4 Foreword Introduction 
1.1 This document  is Wyre Forest  District  Council's  Local  Plan.  In accordance  with Regulation 
19 of the Town and Country  Planning  (Local  Planning)  (England)  Regulations  2012  it was 
published  to allow  representations  to be made  before  submitting  the document  to the Planning 
Inspectorate.  The re-opened  consultation  on the Local  Plan Pre-Submission  Publication  ran 
from 2nd September  2019  to 14thOctober  2019 . All representations  received  from this consultation 
and the previous  Pre-Submission  consultation,  that was held in Autumn/Winter  2018,  were 
submitted  with the Local  Plan to the Secretary  of State  in April 2020  for examination  in public. 
1.2 Wyre Forest  District  Council  (WFDC)  is the local planning  authority  responsible  for 
producing  the Local  Plan;  town  and parish  councils  can produce  neighbourhood  plans,  and 
Worcestershire  County  Council  is responsible  for producing  the minerals  and waste  local plans. 
Together  these  plans  make  up the Development  Plan,  which  sets out where  development  can 
take place,  or where  it should  be avoided,  and what  form and type of development  should  take 
place. 
What  is the Local  Plan? 
1.3 This document  is the Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan.  It sets out the long-term  vision  and 
strategic  context  for managing  and accommodating  growth  within  the District  until 2036  in order 
to contribute  to the achievement  of sustainable  development.  The aim of the Local  Plan is to 
set out: 
the areas  where  development  will take place; 
the areas  that will be protected;  and 
policies  that will be used  to determine  planning  applications. 
1.4 Under  the planning  system  most  development  needs  planning  permission.  The principal 
basis  for making  those  decisions  is the development  plan;  this Local  Plan forms  the main  part 
of it for Wyre Forest  District,  replacing  the previously  adopted  Local  Plan. 
How  has the Local  Plan  been  prepared? 
1.5 The key stages  for preparing  the Local  Plan included  gathering  evidence,  identifying  key 
issues  and options  and public  consultation.  The Council  consulted  extensively  on the 
development  of the Local  Plan.  Key public  consultations  that were  undertaken  are listed  below: 
Issues  and Options  consultation  - Autumn  2015 
Preferred  Options  consultation  - Summer  2017 
Pre-Submission  Publication  consultation  - Autumn/Winter  2018 
Re-opening  of Pre-Submission  Publication  consultation  - September/October  2019 
1.6 The Council  received  more  than 1,600  responses  to the Issues  and Options  public 
consultation,  and over 5,000  responses  to the Preferred  Options  public  consultation,  many  of 
which  were  very detailed.  The Council  also received  over 1,500  responses  for the Pre-Submission 
consultations.  Summaries  of the consultation  responses  and key issues  raised   for the 
consultations  are available  on the Council's  website.   In addition,  the Council  undertook  a number 
Wyre Forest  District 
5 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 1 Introduction  and Context of 'Call for Sites'  during  which  landowners  were  able to submit  their sites for consideration. 
Various  meetings  were  held throughout  the process  including  meetings  with Worcestershire 
County  Council,  meetings  with Statutory  Consultees  such  as Historic  England  and Natural 
England,  ongoing  discussions  with service  and infrastructure  providers  and other  local authorities 
and key bodies.  Wherever  possible,  responses  were  taken  into account  in the preparation  of 
this Local  Plan. 
1.7 The Submission  version  of the Local  Plan was approved  by a meeting  of the full Council 
in February  2020.  The Council  submitted  the Submission  version  of the Local  Plan in April 2020 
to the Secretary  of State  for examination  by an independent  Government  appointed  Planning 
Inspector . All consultation  responses  received  for the Local  Plan Pre-Submission  Publication 
documents  and the evidence  base  studies  were  passed  to the Planning  Inspector .  
1.8 The examination  in public  commenced  in April 2020  with the Public  Hearings  held in early 
2021  and the adoption  of the Local  Plan took place  in April 2022. 
National  Planning  Policy 
1.9 The content  of the Wyre Forest  Local  Plan has to be consistent  with the Government's 
national  planning  policy  as set out in the National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF),  enabling 
the delivery  of sustainable  development  in accordance  with the NPPF . The Plan has also been 
informed  by the guidance  contained  in the National  Planning  Practice  Guidance,  the content  of 
new relevant  legislation  and Government  statements  about  planning.  Whilst  preparing  this Local 
Plan,  the Government  published  its draft revised  NPPF  in March  2018  with the final version 
being  published  on 24th July 2018.  Further  updates  to the NPPF  were  later published  by the 
Government  on 19th February  2019  and 20th July 2021 . 
Background  and Context 
1.10 The Council  has a legal  obligation  to have  an up-to-date  Local  Plan.  The Local  Plan 
review  process  commenced  in September  2015  with the "Issues  and Options"  consultation 
which  set out the key reasons  for a review: 
To consider  the amount  of development  that will be required  in response  to the most  recent 
official data (including  population  trends,  demand  for housing,  economic  trends)  and locally 
generated  evidence. 
To respond  to changes  in legislation  (including  the Housing  and Planning  Act 2016)  and 
national  planning  policy  as reflected  in the National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF) 
and National  Planning  Practice  Guidance  (NPPG). 
To respond  to the Government's  demand  that Local  Planning  Authorities  should  have  a 
Local  Plan that is regularly  reviewed  and evidence-based  to enable  them  to respond 
strategically  to changing  development  needs  over at least  a 15 year period. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 6 Introduction  and Context 1 1.11 This Local  Plan document  is a complete  Plan and replaces  the previously  adopted  Local 
Plan,  which  included  the Core  Strategy  (2010),  Site Allocations  and Policies  Local  Plan (2013), 
and the Kidderminster  Central  Area  Action  Plan (2013).  As such  the coverage  of the new Local 
Plan is: 
The strategic  element  and policies  (Part  A)  
The development  management  policies  (Part  B)  
The allocations  policies  (Part  C)  
The approach  to monitoring  and implementation  (Part  D). 
Influences  on the development  of the Local  Plan 
1.12 National  planning  policy  includes  the National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF).  The 
NPPF  sets out a number  of fundamental  issues  that need  to be taken  into account  during  the 
preparation  of local plans,  which  include  the following  requirements: 
a. To set out a clear  economic  vision  and strategy  for the area which  positively  and proactively 
encourages  sustainable  economic  growth. 
b. To use a robust  and up-to-date  evidence  base  to ensure  that the local plan meets  the 
objectively  assessed  needs  for the market  and affordable  housing  in the housing  market 
area,  as far as it is consistent  with the policies  set out in the NPPF , including  identifying 
key sites that are critical  to the delivery  of the housing  strategy  over the plan period. 
c. To set criteria,  or identify  strategic  sites,  that will help to encourage  local and inward 
investment  to match  the strategy  and meet  anticipated  needs  over the plan period. 
d. To maintain  a five-year  supply  of deliverable  housing  sites with an appropriate  buffer. 
e. To recognise  a duty to co-operate  between  public  bodies  and to implement  a new soundness 
test, to ensure  that plans  are "positively  prepared." 
1.13 Wyre Forest  District  is unusual  in that it currently  constitutes  a self contained  Housing 
Market  Area  whilst  at the same  time it is a member  of two Local  Enterprise  Partnerships  (LEPs) 
- namely  Greater  Birmingham  and Solihull  LEP and Worcestershire  LEP. This provides  Wyre 
Forest  with a range  of opportunities  to further  enhance  its economic  position,  access  funding 
streams  and ensure  that the area is able to continue  to look both towards  the rest of 
Worcestershire  and the conurbation  in the same  way that it has done  for many  years.  It also 
brings  a range  of challenges  in terms  of ensuring  that development  is balanced,  is proportionate 
to the capacity  of the District  and does  not undermine  the unique  character  of the area. 
1.14  In 2013  leaders  from Worcestershire's  business,  voluntary , community  and public  sector 
organisations  pledged  to work  together  to create  a better  future  for Worcestershire.  Expressed 
via "Worcestershire  Next Generation"  (1) this provides  an update  to the Sustainable  Community 
Strategy . 
1 http://www .wearethenextgeneration.co.uk 
Wyre Forest  District 
7 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 1 Introduction  and Context The Duty  to Co-operate 
1.15 The Duty to Co-operate  was introduced  through  the Localism  Act 2011 and places  a 
requirement  on Local  Planning  Authorities  (as well as a number  of other  public  bodies)  to work 
together  on cross-boundary  strategic  issues.  Local  Planning  Authorities  and other  public  bodies 
are required  to engage  constructively , actively  and on an on-going  basis  to develop  strategic 
policies.  This requirement  is also established  in national  planning  policy  (NPPF , paragraphs  24 
to 27). 
1.16 The NPPF  includes  a 'soundness'  requirement  to be met through  the compliance  with 
the Duty to Co-operate.  Plans  are to be positively  prepared  based  on a strategy  which  seeks 
to meet  objectively  assessed  development  and infrastructure  requirements,  including  unmet 
requirements  from neighbouring  authorities  where  it is reasonable  to do so and consistent  with 
achieving  sustainable  development.  Joint  working  should  be diligently  undertaken  for the mutual 
benefit  of neighbouring  authorities  and enable  Local  Planning  Authorities  to work  together  to 
meet  development  requirements  which  cannot  wholly  be met within  their own areas.  Local 
Planning  Authorities  will be expected  to demonstrate  evidence  of having  effectively  co-operated 
to plan for issues  with cross  boundary  impacts  when  their Local  Plans  are submitted  for 
examination.  Co-operation  should  be a continuous  process  of engagement. 
1.17 As part of its plan making  process,  Wyre Forest  District  Council  consulted  and engaged 
with relevant  Local  Planning  Authorities  and other  public  bodies  on emerging  policies  at key 
stages.  The Duty to Co-operate  formalised  this process  and placed  an emphasis  on continuity . 
1.18 Wyre Forest  District  Council  is fully committed  to continuing  to work  positively  and 
proactively  with other  local authorities  and public  bodies  to address  strategic  issues  in the longer 
term,  particularly  with regards  to addressing  opportunities  to meet  unmet  housing  needs.  Where 
necessary , Statements  of Common  Ground  were  prepared  for the purposes  of the examination 
stage  (in accordance  with NPPF). 
Evidence 
1.19 In order  to ensure  that the Local  Plan's  policies  are robust  and supported  by evidence, 
the Council  has carried  out and commissioned  a wide range  of studies.  Work undertaken 
included  the following  and can be viewed  on the Council's  Planning  Policy  webpages: 
Housing  Need  Study 
Housing  and Economic  Land  Availability  Assessment 
Site Selection  Paper 
Employment  Land  Review 
Green  Belt Study 
Strategic  Flood  Risk Assessment 
Water Cycle  Study 
Heritage  Impact  Assessment 
Ecological  Appraisals 
Open  Space,  Built Facilities  and Playing  Pitch  Strategies 
A revised  settlement  hierarchy 
Retail  and Commercial  Leisure  Needs  Survey 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 8 Introduction  and Context 1 Traffic Modelling  and Transport  Evidence  Paper 
Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan 
Viability  Assessment 
1.20 A Sustainability  Appraisal  report  is also required  under  European  and government 
legislation,  which  has to assess  the sustainability  implications  of the proposals  and policies  in 
the Local  Plan.  A Sustainability  Appraisal  report  was therefore  prepared  to accompany  the Local 
Plan. 
Using  this Local  Plan  Document 
1.21 This Local  Plan has been  written  with the intention  that it should  be read as a whole. 
Taken  together , the policies  and proposals  within  the Local  Plan will form a coherent  strategy 
for development  in the Wyre Forest  District  area up to 2036  (Local  Plan period  is 2016  to 2036). 
It is therefore  important  that individual  policies  are not considered  in isolation.   
1.22 The policies  in the Local  Plan will only apply  where  planning  permission  is required  and 
not where  permitted  development  rights  exist as set out in the Town and Country  Planning 
(General  Permitted  Development)  (England)  Order  2015. 
1.23 This document  is accompanied  by a Policies  Map which  shows  the area specific  policies 
and proposals  on an Ordnance  Survey  base  map.  The Policies  Map identifies  areas  to be 
allocated  for development  and designations  which  need  to be taken  into account  in applying 
policies.  The Local  Plan Policies  Map does  not replicate  proposals  and designations  from the 
'made'  neighbourhood  plans  and their maps  will need  to be consulted  separately . 
Wyre Forest  District 
9 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 1 Introduction  and Context Key stages  of the Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan 
Issues and Options Consultation  
September/October 2015  
 
Preferred Options Consultation  
June – August 2017  
 
Pre-Submission Publication  
Consultation  
November /December  2018  
 
Re-opening of Pre-Submission 
Publication  Consultation  
September /October 2019  
 
Submission  
March 2020  
 
Examination  
January – February 2021  
 
Inspector’s Report  
March 2022  
 
Adoption  
April 2022  
 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 Introduction  and Context 1 Wyre Forest  today  – a pen picture 
2.1 This section  paints  a picture  of Wyre Forest  District  and provides  a snapshot  of its key 
features.  It also summarises  the key issues  facing  the District.  These  include  continuing  to make 
the most  of brownfield  regeneration,  ensuring  that we have  thriving  communities  with suitable 
jobs and homes  and ensuring  that the natural  environment  is enhanced,  used  and enjoyed  by 
all.  
The Settlement  Hierarchy 
2.2 Wyre Forest  District  is named  after one of the largest  ancient  semi-natural  woodlands  in 
the country  and is situated  in north-west  Worcestershire.  The local authority  area covers  75 
sq.miles  and has an estimated  population  of around  100,600  people  in 2018(2). 
2.3 The population  increased  by 1.1%  (2001-201 1), by a further  1.1%  from 2013  to 2015  and 
again  by a further  1.1%  from 2015  to 2017.  The rate of growth  in Wyre Forest  District  is below 
that of Worcestershire  which  is 6.7%,  the West Midlands  8.9%,  or England  10.8%  (Amion  2017). 
The population  of Wyre Forest  District  is projected  to increase  by 4.9%  over the course  of the 
Plan Period  2016-2036.  This means  that the population  is likely  to rise to 105,300  in 2036(3). 
The District  has an ageing  population.  The population  aged  65 years  and over is expected  to 
increase  by 28.1%  from 24,200  in 2016  to 31,800  in 2036(4). 
2.4 The District  is largely  rural and has three  towns:  Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and 
Bewdley . The three  towns  form a triangle  of settlements  at the centre  of the District;  between 
each  of the towns  is a narrow  area of countryside.  Each  of the towns  has its own character  and 
community  identity . 
2.5 Kidderminster  (pop.56,538  in 2016),  is the largest  of the three  towns  and is the main 
centre  for retail,  industry  and housing.  The town  developed  rapidly  in the 19th Century  as a 
world  leading  centre  for the production  of carpet.  This manufacturing  industry  has been  in decline 
since  the 1970s. 
2.6 Stourport-on-Severn  (pop.20,542  in 2016),  developed  as an important  industrial  Georgian 
Canal  Town at the confluence  of the River  Severn   and River  Stour  with the construction  of the 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal.  For over 100 years  this attractive  town  with its riverside 
meadows  has been  a popular  day trip destination  for residents  from Birmingham  and the Black 
Country . 
2.7 Bewdley  has a population  of approximately  9,000  (including  the surrounding  rural area 
the population  is approximately  13,802)  and is a Georgian  riverside  town,  an inland  port with 
surviving  wharves  which  saw significant  development  during  the 1960s.  Today  Bewdley  is an 
attractive  historic  market  town  and a popular  visitor  destination. 
2 ONS  2016  Subnational  Population  Projections 
3 ONS  2016  Subnational  Population  Projections 
4 ONS  2016  Subnational  Population  Projections 
Wyre Forest  District 
11 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 2 Key Issues  and Challenges 2.8 To the east,  the larger  more  accessible  villages  include  Blakedown  and Cookley  which 
are served  by both facilities  and public  transport,  Blakedown  having  a railway  station.  Villages 
in the west,  which  include  Rock  and Far Forest,  are smaller  with fewer  facilities  and more  limited 
public  transport. 
    
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 12 Key Issues  and Challenges 2 Context  Map showing  overview  of District 
M5A456A442
A449A451
A456
A450A448A451A449A442
Malvern Hills District Wychavon DistrictBromsgrove
DistrictDudley Council South Sta ﬀs 
District Council
Shropshire 
CouncilMain Towns
Villages 
(Not in Green Belt)
Rural 
Settlements 
Outlying 
Settlements
Major Roads
MotorwayCommercial 
Railway 
Railway Stations
Severn Valley 
Railway 
Main Rivers
Flood Zone 2 
Flood Zone 3 
Staffordshire and 
Worcestershire 
Canal 
The Wyre Forest 
District Green 
Belt
Countryside 
(Outside Green Belt)
Adjoining 
AuthoritiesKEY
District Boundary
(C) Crown Copyright. All Rights Reserved. 100018317. 2022To Bridgnorth 
To Worcester To Birmingham Hagley Stourbridge 
Halesowen 
Bromsgrove Kinver Alveley 
Highley 
Hartlebury 
Chaddesley  
Corbett Blakedown 
Rock Bliss Gate Clows  
Top Far 
Forest Wolverley 
Cookley 
Fairfield 
Wilden Upper  
Arley 
Callow Hill Belbroughton KIDDERMINSTER 
BEWDLEY 
STOURPORT 
-ON-SEVERN Lea Castle
Wyre Forest  District 
13 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 2 Key Issues  and Challenges Issues  facing  Wyre Forest  District 
2.9 During  the plan making  stages  of this Local  Plan a range  of challenges  that face the Wyre 
Forest  District  were  considered  and consulted  on. The consultations  provided  valuable  feedback 
to the development  of the Local  Plan which  has helped  to steer  the spatial  development  strategy . 
2.10 Table 2.0.1  sets out the issues  facing  the district  and are divided  into three  categories: 
social;  economic;  and environmental.   
Table 2.0.1  Issues  facing  Wyre Forest  District 
Social  issues  for Wyre Forest  District: 
Ageing  population.  Low percentage  of residents  in the 0-19 and 20-39  age groups.  High proportion  of 
residents  aged  45-64;  very high proportion  of residents  aged  65+. 
The ageing  population  means  that more  care facilities  are needed  for elderly/end  of life as well as 
specialist  accommodation. 
The elderly  may want  to downsize  to smaller  residential  units  which  could  free up family  sized 
accommodation.  Need  to ensure  that residential  development  caters  for all groups  in society . 
There  are high obesity  levels. 
The District  has a low level of in-migration. 
Whilst  the population  has increased,  the number  of households  has increased  at a greater  rate as the 
quantity  of residents  per unit of accommodation  is falling. 
Housing  affordability  problems. 
Need  to ensure  that residential  development  caters  for all groups  in society . 
Fuel poverty . 
Noticeable  variations  in health  between  those  living  in the most  affluent  wards  and those  living  in the 
most  deprived  wards  in the District. 
High costs  of providing  healthcare  for an ageing  population  with high obesity  which  results  in more 
medical  intervention;  for example,  hospital  stays  or visits  to GPs. 
Low availability  of services  in the District’ s rural areas. 
Leisure  and sport  facilities  should  be accessible  to local residents.  Participation  in swimming  and attending 
the gym are highest  within  the District  with over 10% of the public  accessing  these  activities. 
Economic  issues  for Wyre Forest  District: 
Reduction  in traditional  manufacturing  industries  – need  for employment  opportunities  and suitable 
housing.  Working  age people  need  to be attracted  to the District  as economically  active  people  improve 
the area.  This helps  retail  and regenerates  the area;  more  people  spending  money  encourages  more 
shops;  this in turn improves  the town  centre  so that more  retailers  wish to open  shops,  restaurants  and 
provide  services. 
The ratio of economically  dependent  people  to economically  active  people  is high.  Therefore,  we need 
to attract  more  economically  active  people  to the District  to ensure  that communities  are better  balanced. 
Generally  low unemployment  within  the District;  however , there  are pockets  of higher  unemployment  in 
Foley  Park and Hoobrook  ward  and Broadwaters  ward. 
Lower  earnings,  both by location  of employment  and by residence  than the West Midlands  or Great 
Britain.  It is likely  that many  people  are commuting  to Worcester  or Birmingham  for higher  paid jobs. 
About  40% of residents  commute  to outside  the district  for work.   Need  to raise  wage  levels  by attracting 
employers  with higher  wages,  thus reducing  the wages  gap between  the district  and neighbouring  local 
authority  areas,  and reducing  commuting. 
Development  of brownfield  sites - current  Government  policy  states  that 90% of suitable  brownfield  sites 
should  have  a Local  Development  Order  for residential  development  by 2020.  This could  potentially  push 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 14 Key Issues  and Challenges 2 Social  issues  for Wyre Forest  District: 
industrial  development  into other  areas  such  as the Green  Belt. Diversify  the economy , create  more 
skilled  jobs to reduce  out of District  commuting  and increase  the retention  of young  educated  residents. 
Need  to deliver  infrastructure  to support  housing  and employment  development. 
Improve  rates  of qualification  at both GCSE  level and higher  and further  education. 
Greater  diversity  of shops  as improvements  are made  to Kidderminster  shopping  centre  to encourage 
more  visitors  to the town  centres  and to tourist  attractions  throughout  Wyre Forest  District. 
Need  to regenerate  the town  centres,  areas  of the town  centre  which  have  been  traditionally  retail  could 
change  to other  uses  and the primary  shopping  area could  be redefined. 
Environmental  issues  for Wyre Forest  District: 
Pressure  for development  in the Green  Belt as over half of the District  falls within  the West Midlands 
Green  Belt. 
Pressure  for development  in flood  zones. 
Safeguarding  the best and most  versatile  agricultural  land. 
Improving  air quality  and water  quality . 
Ensuring  that new development  reflects  Wyre Forest  District's  distinctive  character . 
Protecting,  conserving  and, where  it is possible  to do so, enhancing  the District's  rich natural  environment 
and heritage  assets. 
Planning  for the impact  of climate  change,  which  includes  flooding,  in new development. 
Poor  air quality  (AQMA)  at Horsefair , Kidderminster  and Welch Gate,  Bewdley . 
2.11 In addition  to the issues  highlighted  in Table 2.0.1,  respondents  to the consultations 
raised  concerns  relating  to the following  issues: 
Very poor public  transport  and high levels  of traffic congestion  with poor strategic  transport 
infrastructure.  It was strongly  felt by consultees  that these  issues  need  to be addressed  to 
encourage  further  investment  in the District. 
Concern  that infrastructure  i.e GP surgeries  and schools  are at capacity  and more  dwellings 
would  mean  more  population  that would  add to the problem. 
Concern  raised  regarding  the number  of dwellings  required  and amount  of employment 
land required  as many  considered  the amount  required  is too high. 
Many  residents  concerned  that development  of dwellings  or employment  may take place 
in the Green  Belt. 
Many  residents  wanted  brownfield  sites to be developed  before  greenfield  or Green  Belt 
sites. 
Many  local residents  raised  the importance  of protecting  the Green  Belt and concerns  over 
increased  recreational  pressures  on the countryside. 
 A number  of comments  were  received  regarding  the future  role of the Severn  Valley Railway 
and the part it could  play in improving  passenger  transport. 
A number  of landowners  and others  involved  in the development  industry  registered  their 
concern  that the relationship  between  the Green  Belt, brownfield  land availability , housing 
completions  and employment  opportunities  had not been  addressed. 
Many  residents  commented  that Kidderminster  town centre  needs  regeneration  and a range 
of uses  introduced  into the centre  including  residential. 
Wyre Forest  District 
15 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 2 Key Issues  and Challenges 2.12 The issues  set out above  have  been  considered  during  the development  of this Local 
Plan together  with evidence  from the evidence  base  studies. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 16 Key Issues  and Challenges 2 Overall  Sustainable  Development  Objectives 
3.1 In order  to achieve  a sustainable  end result,  the Local  Plan (through  its overall  approach 
and policies)  needs  to perform  a number  of roles:   
a. An economic  role – contributing  to building  a strong,  responsive  and competitive  Wyre 
Forest  economy  by:  
i. Ensuring  that sufficient  land of the right type is available  in the right locations  and at the 
right time to support  economic  and social  growth  and innovation.   
ii. Identifying  and co-ordinating  development  requirements,  including  the provision  of 
infrastructure. 
iii. Promoting  accessibility  to everyday  facilities  for all, especially  those  without  a car or those 
seeking  to achieve  a modal  shift away  from the car. 
iv. Implementing  the Worcestershire  LEP Strategic  Economic  Plan. 
v. Implementing  the Greater  Birmingham  and Solihull  Strategic  Economic  Plan. 
b. A social  role – supporting  strong,  vibrant  and healthy  communities  in Wyre Forest  District 
by:  
i. Ensuring  that a sufficient  number  and range  of homes  can be provided  to meet  the needs 
of present  and future  generations. 
ii. Fostering  well-designed,  beautiful  and safe places,  with accessible  services  and open 
spaces  that reflect  current  and future  needs  and support  communities’  health,  social  and 
cultural  well-being.   
iii. Creating  a strong  sense  of place  by strengthening  the distinctive  and cultural  qualities  of 
towns  and villages 
iv. Creating  safe and accessible  environments  where  crime,  disorder  and the fear of crime  do 
not undermine  quality  of life or community  cohesion 
c. An environmental  role - protecting  and enhancing  Wyre Forest  District’ s unique  natural, 
built and historic  environment  by: 
i. Making  effective  use of land.   
ii. Improving  biodiversity . 
iii. Using  natural  resources  prudently .  
iv. Minimising  waste  and pollution. 
v. Safeguarding  and enhancing  landscape  character .  
vi. Protecting  significant  historic  buildings,  monuments,  sites of archaeological  significance 
and the integrity  of local planning  designations.   
vii. Protecting  and enhancing  green  infrastructure.   
viii. Mitigating  and adapting  to climate  change  and flood  risk, including  moving  to a low carbon 
economy  and reducing  flood  risk and wastewater  through  water  management. 
3.2  These  roles  should  be delivered  through  the application  of the policies  within  the NPPF 
and the Development  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
17 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 3 Vision  for the Area  in 2036 3.3  Economic  growth  can secure  higher  social  and environmental  standards  and 
well-designed,  beautiful  and safe buildings  and places  can improve  the lives of people  and 
communities.  For example,  the promotion  of local food production  can help support  and diversify 
the local agricultural  economy , promote  healthier  lifestyles  and provide  valuable  habitats  or 
wildlife.  Similarly , sustainable  drainage  can provide  a cost-ef fective  measure  to reduce  the 
environmental  impact  of surface  water  run-of f and increase  resilience  to flooding.  To achieve 
sustainable  development,  economic,  social  and environmental  gains  will be sought  jointly  and 
concurrently  wherever  possible. 
3.4 The Local  Plan will seek  to guide  development  to achieve  sustainable  solutions  and the 
policies,  taken  as a whole,  constitute  the authority’ s view of what sustainable  development  means 
in practice  for Wyre Forest  when  promoted  through  the planning  system. 
3.5  Development  proposals  will need  to accord  with the Development  Plan,  which  comprises 
the adopted  Local  Plan,  neighbourhood  plans  that have  been  made,  the Waste Core  Strategy , 
Minerals  Local  Plan,  and the Local  Transport  Plan.  Neighbourhood  plans  that have  been 
approved  at referendum  are also part of the Development  Plan,  unless  the District  Council 
decides  that the neighbourhood  plan should  not be made.  Any relevant  adopted  Supplementary 
Planning  Documents  should  also be considered  as part of the planning  application  process. 
Visions  and Objectives  for 2036 
3.6 Table 3.0.1  presents  the Local  Plan's  vision  for Wyre Forest  District  up to 2036. 
Table 3.0.1   Vision:  What  will Wyre Forest  District  be like in 2036? 
1. In 2036  the three  main  towns  of Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  in Wyre Forest  District 
continue  to maintain  their distinctive  and separate  identities  and will be the main  focus  for growth  within 
the district.   The outlying  villages  have  grown  organically  to meet  their own needs.    The Rivers  Severn 
and Stour  and the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  together  with other  green  infrastructure  are 
valued  links for both wildlife  and residents  within  and between  the town  centres,  the surrounding 
countryside  and villages. 
2. The District’ s varied  natural  habitats,  together  with its diverse  and historic  landscapes  are thriving,  and 
offer a range  of outdoor  interests,  contributing  to local educational  opportunities  and sustainable  tourism. 
Residents  and businesses  rely increasingly  on energy  from locally  generated  renewable  sources.  Water 
management  forms  an integral  part of the planning  and design  of developments.  This includes  the 
mitigation  of flood  risk, water  efficiency  and widely  used  SuDS. 
3. Kidderminster  has benefited  from sustainable  brownfield  regeneration.  The attractive  and accessible 
town  centre  provides  a range  of retail  and commercial  leisure  opportunities  as well as civic spaces  and 
urban  greenspace.  Kidderminster  supports  a vibrant  visitor  economy  and a flourishing  evening  economy . 
Through  its links with the region’ s Universities  and Colleges,  Kidderminster  provides  an important 
educational  and vocational  training  centre.  The transformation  of the town  has been  enhanced  by an 
improved  transport  infrastructure  through  which  traffic congestion  in the town centre  has been  considerably 
reduced  with an associated  improvement  in air quality  and opportunity  for regeneration. 
4. Stourport-on-Severn  offers a range  of facilities  to local residents  and visitors  alike and its canal  and 
riverside  remain  a key visitor  attraction.   Its public  realm  is enhanced  through  the restoration  of its unique 
heritage  including  the canal  basins  and the regeneration  of Bridge  Street. 
5. Bewdley  remains  a thriving  market  town  which  meets  the local community’ s needs.  The town’ s historic 
character  is preserved  and its flourishing  riverside  environment  continues  to attract  visitors. 
6. To the east of the District,  the larger  villages  of Cookley  and Blakedown  continue  to provide  local residents 
and the surrounding  rural hinterlands  with key local services.  There  remain  more  limited  services, 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 18 Vision  for the Area  in 2036 3 focussing  on the needs  of local communities,  in settlements  to the west such  as Rock,  Clows  Top and 
Far Forest. 
7. The District's  housing  market  provides  a choice  of accommodation  responding  well to local needs  and 
catering  for single  households,  families  and the elderly  in particular .  Job creation  is balanced  with housing 
delivery , encouraging  younger  people  to remain  within  and be attracted  to the District   to create  a better 
balanced  population  structure. 
8. A vibrant  and sustainable  economy  exists,  primarily  focussed  around  Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn 
and the Stourport  Road  Employment  Corridor  providing  a range  of jobs across  the service,  retail,  research 
and development  and manufacturing  sectors,  with the infrastructure  and a skilled  population  in place  to 
support  it.  The urban  areas  of Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn  and the South  Kidderminster 
Enterprise  Park are the main  focus  for employment  but they are supported  by the rural economy  including 
several  existing  and significant  industrial  estates  where  sustainable  growth  will have  occurred,  and 
sustainable  tourism. 
9. The three  towns  and rural areas  are well served  by a sustainable  transport  network  that delivers  high 
levels  of accessibility  to key services  and attractions  by a variety  of modes  of transport.   The urban 
environments  have  experienced  reduced  levels  of traffic congestion  and improved  air quality  within  the 
town centres  which  has encouraged  the renaissance  of Kidderminster  town centre.  Kidderminster  Railway 
Station  acts as a high quality  gateway  to the District  providing  convenient  interchange  for pedestrians 
and cyclists  alike.  Frequent  rail links to the nearby  regional  centre  of Birmingham  and the sub-regional 
centre  of Worcester  give access  to higher  order  services.  There  will also be traffic calming  measures  in 
place  around  schools  that are properly  enforced. 
10. Crime  and disorder  in the District  remain  low and local residents  feel safer . Residents  have  the opportunity 
to lead healthier  lifestyles  with improved  access  to clean  and attractive  green  spaces,  facilitated  by a 
comprehensive  network  of routes  suitable  for vulnerable  users  (e.g. walkers,  cyclists,  horse  riders). 
Young  residents  can access  a variety  of activities  and facilities  in the three  towns  and can make  better 
use of community  facilities  in the rural villages.  Educational  achievement  rates  have  improved,  particularly 
in the wards  of Oldington  & Foley  Park and Broadwaters.  (5) Local  residents  are more  skilled  through 
improved  access  to training  opportunities  within  the community .  As they get older , residents'  good  health 
and wellbeing  continues  through  easy  access  to quality  health  care and community  facilities. 
11. New development  in Wyre Forest  is properly  supported  by the timely  provision  of suitable  infrastructure. 
12. Lea Castle  Village  will be a new sustainable  village  with enough  housing  to generate  a new village  centre 
with its own local shop,  primary  school,  employment  uses  and new and upgraded  sports  pitches.  It will 
be set within  an extensive  woodland/landscape  setting. 
13. The Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension  will be a well-designed  residential  development  offering  a choice 
of high quality  new homes  to meet  local needs  set within  an extensive  area of green  space  which  is 
readily  accessible  to everyone  in the area.  It will also provide  a new primary  school  and a community 
hub with retail  provision. 
5 Pre May 2015  Wards are referred  to as data is not yet available  for new Wards. 
Wyre Forest  District 
19 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 3 Vision  for the Area  in 2036 Local  Plan  Aim and Objectives 
3.7 The following  plan objectives  (Table 3.0.2)  will help address  the key challenges  facing 
Wyre Forest  District  and will contribute  to the achievement  of the Vision expressed  in Table 
3.0.1. 
Table 3.0.2  Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan  (2016-2036)  – Aim and Objectives 
Plan  Aim 
By 2036  Wyre Forest  will be a District  where  people  want  to live and work  and fulfil their potential  without  the 
need  for excessive  travel. 
Plan  Objectives 
1. To encourage  the long term sustainable  development  of Wyre Forest  and its communities. 
2. To address  the key challenges  facing  the District  especially  in terms  of housing,  employment,  health 
and transport. 
3. To address  housing  needs  in order  that existing  and future  residents’  requirements  are met and the 
economic  development  of the area is supported. 
4. To recognise  the changing  nature  of employment,  encourage  economic  diversification  and make  sufficient 
high quality  employment  sites available. 
5. To maximise  the use of previously  developed  land in order  to ensure  the best use is made  of available 
land both within  and beyond  the main  towns.   
6. To protect  and support  the role of the Green  Belt through  a strategic  review  and to identify  a necessary 
and justified  level of strategic  Green  Belt release  to enable  the delivery  of the plan whilst  reinforcing  the 
role and integrity  of the Green  Belt for future  Plan periods. 
7. To maximise  opportunities  for the inclusion  of green  infrastructure  into high quality  development  in order 
to provide  a good  quality  of life and maximise  the benefits  of walking  and cycling.  Safeguard  and enhance 
the District's  biodiversity  and geodiversity  assets. 
8. To promote  the historic  environment  and conserve  or enhance  the significance  of heritage  assets  and 
their setting  in a manner  appropriate  to their significance,  so that they can be enjoyed  for their contribution 
to the quality  of life of this and future  generations 
9. To increase  provision  and to facilitate  greater  access  to sport,  recreational  and other  community  facilities 
in order  to encourage  healthier  lifestyles  and improve  the health  and wellbeing  of the District's  population. 
10. To improve  connectivity  within  the District  and achieve  more  sustainable  travel  patterns  and reduce  the 
need  to use the private  car through  improved  public  transport  services  (bus and rail), and new and 
enhanced  cycleways  and footpaths.  These  actions  will contribute  to an improvement  in air quality . 
11. To protect  the District's  water  supply  and quality , and reduce  the risk of flooding. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 20 Vision  for the Area  in 2036 3 Document  Structure 
3.8 To address  this range  of challenges  and issues  within  the space  of a single  document  is 
both challenging  and complex.  In order  to achieve  this,  the document  is ordered  according  to 
the following  structure: 
Table 3.0.3  Document  Structure 
Associated  Policies Description Part 
Policy  Title Section 
A Sustainable  Future  – Development  Strategy 5 Strategic  Policies A 
Strategic  Green  Belt Review 6 
A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 
Health  and Wellbeing 8 
A Good  Place  to Do Business 9 
A Unique  Place 10 
Strategic  Infrastructure 11 
Transport  and Accessibility 12 
Green  Infrastructure 13 
Water Management 14 
Pollution,  Minerals  and Waste 15 
Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy 16 
    Key Diagram 
A Desirable  Place  to Live 18 Development 
Management 
Policies B 
Providing  Accommodation  for Gypsies,  Travellers  and Travelling 
Showpeople 19 
Community  Facilities 20 
Employment  Land 21 
Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22 
Sustainable  Tourism 23 
Safeguarding  the Green  Belt 24 
Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment 25 
Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 
Wyre Forest  District 
21 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 3 Vision  for the Area  in 2036 Associated  Policies Description Part 
Policy  Title Section 
Rural  Development 27 
Strategic  Allocation  Lea Castle  Village 29 Site Allocations C 
Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension 30 
Strategic  Allocations  Blakedown 31 
Kidderminster  Town 32 
Stourport-on-Severn 33 
Bewdley 34 
Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 35 
Rural  Wyre Forest 36 
Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework 37 Monitoring  and 
Implementation 
Framework D 
3.9 Wyre Forest  District  Council  is satisfied  that this Local  Plan has been  designed  to achieve 
sustainable  economic  growth  throughout  the plan period,  in accordance  with the requirements 
of the NPPF . It has identified  and promoted  a range  of sites suitable  for housing, 
employment-generating  activity , mixed-use,  commercial  and retail  growth  and appropriate  rural 
diversification  and enterprise  activities. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 22 Vision  for the Area  in 2036 3 4.1 The remainder  of Part A of this Plan sets out the primacy  of the need  for sustainable, 
positively  planned  development  required  to meet  the needs  of Wyre Forest  District  throughout 
this plan period  (2016  - 2036).  In doing  so it describes  the Spatial  Development  Strategy 
necessary  to address  the identified  issues  and challenges  and to guide  development  to ensure 
that it is appropriate  in scale  and balanced. 
4.2 In setting  out the Development  Strategy  this section  proposes  a range  of Strategic  Policies 
intended  to provide  the context  and necessary  framework  for the subsequent  Development 
Management  and Site Allocations  policies  (Sections  B and C respectively)  of this document.   
Wyre Forest  District 
23 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 4 Core  Policies  Introduction 5.1 The Spatial  Development  Strategy  sets out the broad  framework  for future  development 
within  the District  for the 2016-2036  time period.  It takes  forward  the vision  and development 
objectives  into a strategy  to address  the issues  and challenges  facing  the District  and to guide 
development  into the future.  Importantly  it also establishes  a clear  role for the District's 
settlements  in accommodating  future  development. 
5.2 The Spatial  Development  Strategy  is made  up of six policies  which  consider: 
the Development  Needs  – or amount  of development  - to be delivered  within  the Plan period 
and the spatial  distribution  of growth  (Policy  SP.1); 
the general  location  strategy  for new development  and Settlement  Hierarchy  (Policy  SP.2); 
the role of Kidderminster  as the strategic  centre  (Policy  SP.3); 
the role of the Strategic  Allocation  Sites  (Policy  SP.4); 
the role of Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  as market  towns  (Policy  SP.5); and 
the role of the villages  and other  rural settlements  (Policy  SP.6). 
5.3 The 'Key Diagram'  supports  the Spatial  Development  Strategy  by showing  the opportunities 
and constraints  to guide  new development  and significant  future  infrastructure.  The Key Diagram 
is the principal  illustration  of the spatial  strategy . The diagram  identifies  broad  locations  for 
development,  key areas  of constraint,  the main  patterns  of movement  and also outlines  the 
classification  of settlements,  reflecting  the settlement  hierarchy  included  within  the Spatial 
Development  Strategy . The Key Diagram  can be viewed  at the end of Part A. 
Policy  SP.1 - Spatial  Development  Strategy  2016  - 2036 
1. During  the Plan Period  (2016-2036)  Wyre Forest  District  Council  will make  provision 
for, monitor  and manage  the delivery  of housing,  employment  land,  retail  and offices 
at the levels  of development  contained  in Table 5.0.1.  This delivery  will be in accordance 
with the site allocations  set out in Part C of this document. 
2. As required  by the Duty to Co-operate  (6), due consideration  will be given,  through  a 
future  early  review  of the WFDC  Local  Plan where  necessary  and in accordance  with 
the NPPF , to the housing  needs  of neighbouring  local authorities  (7)in circumstances 
when  it has been  clearly  established  through  the local plan process  that these  needs 
must  be met through  provision  in the Wyre Forest  District  area.   The review  will consider 
the need  for additional  growth  and plan appropriately  for this if the need  has been 
clearly  evidenced  and justified. 
6 Section  110, Localism  Act (2011) relating  to unmet  need. 
7 This includes  the Black  Country  Local  Authorities  who are currently  preparing  a joint Local  Plan Review . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 24 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 Table 5.0.1  Wyre Forest  Development  Needs  2016-2036 
Annual  requirement Amount  of Development 
Required Type of Development 
276 (minimum) 5,520 Dwellings  (net additional) 
Not applicable 487 bed spaces C2 use (Institutional  / Care  home  bed 
spaces) 
Not applicable 29 hectares Employment  Land 
Not applicable Zero Comparison  Retailing 
3. Growth  aspirations  for the district  will largely  be directed  towards  the most  sustainable, 
larger  settlements  and towards  the new village  at Lea Castle  and the Kidderminster 
eastern  urban  extension,  as set out in table  5.0.2  below . These  are considered  to be 
the best locations  for delivering  supporting  infrastructure  as well as active  and 
sustainable  travel  choices. 
Table 5.0.2  Spatial  distribution  of growth  over  the period  of Local  Plan  (2016-2036) 
Expected  Minimum  Growth  Delivery Settlement 
1,231  net additional  dwellings Kidderminster  Town 
16 traveller  pitches 
6 travelling  showpeople  pitches 
21.82  ha net additional  employment  land 
1,400  net additional  dwellings Lea Castle  Village 
7.34 ha net additional  employment  land 
1,439  net additional  dwellings Kidderminster  Eastern  Urban  Extension 
1,155  net additional  dwellings Stourport-on-Severn 
4 traveller  pitches 
0.56 ha net additional  employment  land 
227 net additional  dwellings Bewdley 
108 net additional  dwellings Rural  Wyre Forest 
1.7 ha net additional  employment  land  
Wyre Forest  District 
25 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy The expected  growth  delivery  for each  settlement  area as set out in table  5.0.2  within  this 
Policy  are minimum  requirements.  Further  development  within  the District’ s settlement 
areas  will not be refused  if, over the plan period,  growth  expectations  have  been  exceeded 
for any settlement  and provided  development  proposals  are in accordance  with other  policies 
in this Plan. 
Reasoned  Justification 
5.4  In arriving  at its Spatial  Development  Strategy , the Council  has taken  account  of national 
planning  policy , responses  received  through  public  consultation,  and the evidence  that has 
been  prepared  to support  the Local  Plan,  including  the Sustainability  Appraisal.  The Spatial 
Development  Strategy  has been  used  to shape  the site allocations  set out in Part C of the Local 
Plan and will help deliver  the Local  Plan objectives.   
Housing  Provision 
5.5 Housing  provision  will be made  for 5,520  dwellings  (net) which  includes  market  housing 
and affordable  housing  provision.  A separate  provision  for 487 C2 (e.g. care homes  / nursing 
homes  bed spaces)  will also be made.  This level of housing  is considered  appropriate  by Wyre 
Forest  District  Council  in order  to meet  the challenges  posed  by the need  for economic 
regeneration  of the District  and the provision  of an improved  level of affordable  housing  without 
undermining  the local housing  market.  Key objectives  of the Spatial  Development  Strategy 
include  making  provision  for: 
a. The right amount  of land and type of employment  uses  at readily  accessible  locations  in 
which  business  will thrive  and be resilient  to current  and future  challenges; 
b. Sufficient  housing  provision  that enables  the labour  force  to live locally  and contributes  to 
achieving  the right mix of housing  types  so that the wide range  of housing  needs  can be 
met; 
c. Whilst  the current  quantum  of available  retail  provision  is considered  to be broadly  correct 
it will be necessary  to ensure  that the retail  offer is appropriate  to the future  requirements 
of the District.  Therefore,  whilst  it is not anticipated  that there  will be a need  for any additional 
large  scale  provision,  it may be appropriate  for the offer to evolve  in order  to meet  future 
requirements.  Where  additional  requirements  are anticipated  to be required  to support 
housing  allocations  these  are detailed  by the specific  site allocation  policies  in Part C of 
this document. 
d. Infrastructure  that supports  communities  which  are housing  the labour  force  and facilitates 
the movement  of people  to their employment,  education  and other  services  through  the 
alignment  of the phasing  of development  and supporting  infrastructure,  including  green 
infrastructure. 
5.6 The National  Planning  Policy  Framework  requires  that Local  Planning  Authorities,  as a 
minimum,  meet  their objectively  assessed  needs  (OAN)  for both market  and affordable  housing 
(as far as is consistent  with other  policies  in the Framework).  The most  up-to-date  work  on OAN, 
and that which  is used  in this Local  Plan is the Housing  Needs  Study  2018  (HNS,  2018).  This 
2018  study  uses  an updated  set of demographic  projections,  taking  account  of information 
including  2016  based  Sub-National  Population  Projections  from ONS  and the most  up-to-date 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 2016  based  Household  Projections.  It also takes  account  of the Government's  new standardised 
methodology  for calculating  housing  need.  This HNS  (2018)  study  supercedes  all previous 
Objectively  Assessed  Needs  Reports  published  by the Council.   It is important  to note that the 
Council  has not used  the 2014  based  Household  Projections  as this would  have  given  a lower 
housing  figure  of 248 dwellings  per annum.  This is because  the Council  wishes  to be ambitious 
with its housing  requirement  figure  in order  to support  economic  growth  and affordable  housing 
delivery . This approach  is supported  by the PPG,  which  states:  “The government  is committed 
to ensuring  that more  homes  are built and supports  ambitious  authorities  who want  to plan for 
growth.  The standard  method  for assessing  local housing  need  provides  a minimum  starting 
point  in determining  the number  of homes  needed  in an area.  It does  not attempt  to predict  the 
impact  that future  government  policies,  changing  economic  circumstances  or other  factors  might 
have  on demographic  behaviour . Therefore,  there  will be circumstances  where  it is appropriate 
to consider  whether  actual  housing  need  is higher  than the standard  method  indicates.”  (PPG, 
Paragraph:  010 Reference  ID: 2a-010-20190220). 
5.7 As such  the figure  of 5,520  (from  the HNS  study , 2018)  reflects  the necessary  housing 
requirement  to satisfy  housing  need  plus additional  need  arising  from the necessity  to provide 
additional  affordable  housing  and opportunities  for economic  growth.  The same  report  separately 
identifies  an additional  requirement  of 487 C2 (e.g. care homes  / nursing  homes  bed spaces) 
which  are not part of the 5,520  figure 
Employment  Provision 
5.8 The Employment  Land  Review  (ELR)  (2018)  report  appraised  a range  of employment 
land projections  for Wyre Forest  District  using  a variety  of methodologies  in accordance  with 
the former  Planning  Practice  guidance  (as this being  the most  up-to-date  PPG  at the time).  A 
range  of factors  were  considered  within  the report  to help inform  the judgement  on the appropriate 
level of employment  need  for the district.  The ELR report  concludes  that the employment  land 
requirement  for Wyre Forest  District  should  be 29ha  of land between  2016  and 2036.  The Local 
Plan seeks  to allocate  sufficient  employment  land to accommodate  this employment  need  of 
29ha. 
Annual  requirements 
5.9 Table 5.0.1  sets out the annual  minimum  housing  requirement  for the Wyre Forest  District. 
This is derived  by a simple  division  of the housing  requirement  (5,520)  by the number  of years 
that the Plan will apply  (20 years).  This equates  to an annual  minimum  housing  requirement  of 
276 dwellings.  As discussed  in Policy  SP.10 (Affordable  Housing)  there  will be a number  of 
elements  that make  up the affordable  housing  component. 
5.10 Sites  considered  unsuitable  (e.g. because  of flood  risk),  not viable  or not deliverable 
have  been  excluded.  As in all plan making  it is also necessary  to adopt  a precautionary  approach 
to allow  for sites that may not be delivered  - this is particularly  the case  for sites with a poor 
viability  (such  as brownfield  sites).  It is therefore  necessary  to identify  some  additional  sites so 
that in the event  of a site not coming  forward,  or sites being  excluded  from the Local  Plan,  the 
District  is able to demonstrate  that the housing  and employment  requirements  can still be met 
and flexibility  is demonstrated. 
Wyre Forest  District 
27 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5.11 In order  to achieve  the required  flexibility  it was necessary  to propose  allocations  in 
excess  of the housing  requirement  of 5,520.  The Plan therefore  includes  an over allocation  of 
more  than 20%,  to allow  for sites not coming  forward  and to be able to maintain  a rolling  five-year 
housing  land supply . At the time of preparation  of this Local  Plan the Council's  understanding 
of how this might  be achieved  was guided  by the following  available  data. 
Table 5.0.3  Housing  Land  Supply  at 1st April  2021 
 No. of Net Dwellings  (approx)  Source  of Supply 
 1,018  Completions  (1st April 2016  to 31st March  2021) 
 474  Under  Construction  at 1st April 2021 
 1,216  Commitments  not yet started  at 1st April 2021(8) 
 800 Strategic  Allocation  Site - Lea Castle  Village  (non-pdl  part) 
 1,439 Strategic  Allocation  Site - Kidderminster  Eastern  Urban  Extension 
 Remaining  Development  Sites: 
 485                                                          Kidderminster  Town 
 977                                                          Stourport-on-Severn 
 221                                                          Bewdley 
 104                                                          Rural  Settlements 
 6,734  Total: 
Duty  to Co-operate 
5.12 It is clearly  demonstrated  by the HNS  (2018)  that, unusually  in the West Midlands,  the 
Wyre Forest  District  Council  area is co-terminus  with the Wyre Forest  Housing  Market  Area. 
As such  the housing  requirement  reflected  by this Plan is based  solely  on that required  for the 
needs  of Wyre Forest  District.  However , this does  not negate  the need  for the Plan to be prepared 
in consultation  with neighbouring  and near-by  authorities  (e.g. other  Worcestershire  districts, 
Birmingham  and the Black  Country , South  Staffordshire,  Shropshire);  accordingly  Wyre Forest 
District  has co-operated  with authorities  that are both adjoining  and beyond  in order  to consider 
strategic  priorities  for the delivery  of homes,  including  cross-boundary  requirements.  Statements 
of Common  Ground  were  prepared  where  necessary  for the purposes  of the examination  of 
the Local  Plan to evidence  the joint working  and effective  co-operation  consistent  with the Duty 
to Cooperate  legal  requirement  and the NPPF .  
Management  of land supply 
5.13 The Council’ s monitoring  of the provision  of dwellings  demonstrates  that, whilst  under 
normal  economic  circumstances,  a fairly  consistent  supply  can be achieved.  Under  unusually 
buoyant  or depressed  economic  circumstances  extremes  (both  high and low) of delivery  can 
be evidenced.  It is therefore  prudent  to ensure  that the authority  is in a position  to respond 
quickly  to changing  circumstances.  Positive  planning  measures  may be required  to help bring 
forward  sites for development  earlier  in the plan period  to ensure  a five-year  supply  of sites is 
able to be sustained.  Whilst  not exhaustive  such  initiatives  might  include: 
8 * The Commitments  shown  in table  6.0.3  do not include  lapse  rates.  At 1st April 2021,  the lapse  rate was 4%. Applying 
4% to the commitments  not yet started  = 1,216  x 96% = 1,167.  For further  information  on completions  and commitments 
please  refer to the Council's  5 Year Housing  Land  Supply  Report,  which  will be updated  annually  thoughout  the Plan 
Period). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 28 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 a. Working  with house  builders  / landowners  / Registered  Providers,  to monitor  and progress 
the housing  supply  and to identify  any causes  of supply  problems  and where  appropriate 
to act on feedback  received. 
b. Production  of detailed  Planning  Briefs  and / or area-based  Supplementary  Planning 
Documents,  to increase  certainty  for developers  on the progression  of sites through  the 
planning  process. 
c. Regular  meetings  with stakeholders  about  the major  urban  extensions. 
d. As part of the preparation  of Planning  Briefs,  indicate  different  development  permutations 
to accommodate  different  viability  scenarios. 
e. Pre-application  discussions  with developers,  landowners  and their agents  to increase 
certainty  in the development  management  process. 
f. Sensitive  application  of policy  where  issues  around  scheme  viability  have  been  clearly 
demonstrated. 
g. Prioritise  public  sector  land. 
h. Potential  funding  streams,  such  as Homes  England  and other  public  funding  sources. 
i. Testing  of viability  through  an independent  study  and liaison  with developers  about  viability 
issues. 
j. Annual  update  of the Council's  Brownfield  Land  Register . 
k. Bringing  forward  Reserved  Housing  Sites,  subject  to Policy  SP.8. 
Policy  SP.2 - Locating  New Development 
1. The Spatial  Development  Strategy  and the site allocations  in this Plan (as described 
by Policies  SP.3 – SP.6) are based  upon  the following  principles: 
a. Provide  accessible,  attractive  employment  sites and positive  policies  to deliver 
job creation  opportunities. 
b. Provide  for and facilitate  the delivery  of sufficient  accessible  housing  to meet  as 
a minimum  the objectively  assessed  needs  to 2036. 
c. Encourage  the effective  use and re-use  of accessible,  available  and 
environmentally  acceptable  brownfield  land. 
d. Safeguard  and (wherever  possible)  enhance  the open  countryside. 
e. Maintain  the openness  of the Green  Belt (as identified  on the Policies  Map). 
f. Focus  most  development  in and adjacent  to the urban  areas,  where  both housing 
needs  and accessibility  to more  effective  public  service  provision  are greatest. 
g. Protect  from development  areas  that are sensitive  because  of their landscape, 
heritage  assets  or biodiversity . 
2. Windfall  development  proposals  will be assessed  in accordance  with the settlement 
hierarchy  described  in the following  table: 
Wyre Forest  District 
29 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy Table 5.0.4  Wyre Forest  Settlement  Hierarchy 
Suitable  Development Role Settlements 
Included Category 
Kidderminster Main  Town 
 Focus  of large  scale  housing 
provision  including  Kidderminster 
Eastern  Extension 
Administrative  centre 
of the District 
Focus  of public 
services 
 Utilisation  of appropriate  brownfield 
and greenfield  sites,  subject  to the 
more  detailed  Plan policies 
Focus  of employment 
Comparison  and convenience   retail 
(to meet  District  requirements  and 
needs) 
Commercial  leisure 
Large  and small  scale  offices 
Residential 
Employment 
Hotels,  tourism  and leisure 
Sports  and education  facilities 
Major  services 
Stourport-on-Severn Large  Market 
Town 
Support  role in the  provision  of 
larger  scale  housing 
Comprehensive  range 
of local services 
Employment  for 
residents  and those  in 
nearby  rural areas Utilisation  of appropriate  brownfield 
and greenfield  sites,  subject  to the 
more  detailed  Plan policies 
Convenience   retail  (to meet  the 
needs  of Stourport-on-Severn) River/Canal  based 
Tourism  and leisure 
Local  services 
Employment,  offices and commerce 
Sports  and recreation  uses 
Bewdley Market  Town 
 Convenience   retail  to meet  local 
needs. 
A range  of local 
services 
Employment 
opportunities Employment,  offices and commerce 
Housing  to meet  local needs  and to 
ensure  long-term  vitality  and viability especially  for rural 
area west of the River 
Severn 
Leisure  and business  tourism 
Local  services 
Tourism  and leisure 
Chaddesley  Corbett Villages, 
settlements 
Housing  to meet  local needs  via 
allocated  sites and rural exception 
sites in appropriate  circumstances   
Varying  ranges  of local 
services  and facilities 
Wolverley and rural 
hamlets 
 Limited  infilling  in villages 
covered Upper  Arley 
 Local  services 
(washed 
over)  by 
Green  Belt 
Small  scale  rural employment 
including  offices 
Inset  Green  Belt: Other 
villages  and 
Housing  to meet  local needs  via 
allocated  sites and rural exception 
sites in appropriate  circumstances 
Varying  ranges  of 
 local services  and 
facilities rural 
settlements 
Fairfield 
Infill development  within  settlement 
boundary Settlements  to west of 
River  Severn  tend to 
Cookley 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 30 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 Suitable  Development Role Settlements 
Included Category 
have  a widely 
dispersed  catchment 
Blakedown 
 Local  services 
Small  scale  rural employment, 
including  offices Wilden 
for employment, 
services  etc Non Green  Belt: 
Clows  Top 
Rock 
Bliss  Gate 
Far Forest 
Callow  Hill 
Inset  Green  Belt: New Village 
 Residential 
 New sustainable 
village  with enough 
 Lea Castle 
Village 
Employment 
housing  to generate  a 
new village  centre  with 
Sports  and education  facilities 
Local  services 
local facilities  and 
primary  school. 
To also include 
employment  use. 
3. Where  a community  decides  to bring  forward  a Neighbourhood  Plan the District  Council 
will cooperate  with and support  the community  in this activity  so that greater  local 
control  over the location  of development  can be exerted  whilst  supporting  the delivery 
of the Local  Plan.  Neighbourhood  Plans  will need  to be consistent  with the strategic 
policies  of the Local  Plan as a whole  and will be expected  to support  the District  in 
meeting  its development  needs. 
4. Developm ent of land beyond  settlement  boundaries  will be strictly  controlled  and will 
be limited  to dwellings  for rural workers,  replacement  dwellings  and rural exception 
sites (Policy  SP.11); employment  development  in rural areas  and buildings  for 
agriculture  and forestry  (Policy  DM.10)  and renewable  energy  projects  (Policy  SP.37) 
and development  specifically  permitted  by other  Wyre Forest  Local  Plan policies. 
5. The Green  Belt (as identified  on the Policies  Map)  will be maintained  and development 
proposed  within  the Green  Belt will be considered  in accordance  with national  policy 
as set out in the NPPF , and with the policies  set out in this Local  Plan,  in particular , 
Local  Plan Policies  SP.7, SP.8, DM.2,  DM.22  and SA.PDL 
Reasoned  Justification 
5.14 The development  strategy  is driven  by the Wyre Forest  vision  and its associated 
objectives.  It brings  together  land use, development  and infrastructure  considerations  that flow 
from the economic,  environmental  and social  characteristics  of the area.  The Sustainability 
Appraisal  (SA) demonstrates  that the development  strategy  will help deliver  the SA objectives. 
Wyre Forest  District 
31 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5.15 The new development  strategy  builds  upon  the previous  Wyre Forest  Core  Strategy 
which  concentrated  development  on the large  amount  of brownfield  land in the urban  core of 
the District.  Whilst  the new strategy  continues  to maximise  the benefit  of this resource  it will no 
longer  be possible  to be entirely  reliant  on brownfield  land meaning  that some  greenfield  land 
take will be required.  This is due to two key factors: 
a. much  of the readily  available  deliverable  brownfield  land has now been  developed; 
b. the housing  requirement  of Wyre Forest  District  is significantly  greater  than the availability 
of brownfield  land. 
5.16 The purpose  of the settlement  hierarchy  is to provide  a clear  steer  on the future  role of 
the District's  settlements  and to focus  new development  in locations  which  will promote 
sustainable  communities.  The settlement  hierarchy  is based  on an assessment  of the services 
and facilities  that are available  in each  settlement  and further  information  on this can be found 
in the evidence  base  documents  (9). 
5.17 The urban  areas  of the District  have  the greatest  housing  needs  and are locations  where 
the cost of public  service  delivery  is relatively  low. Accordingly  the bulk of development  needs 
that cannot  be met via brownfield  land (including  brownfield  land in the Green  Belt) will be via 
greenfield  land release  adjacent  to the main  towns,  especially  Kidderminster . In the other 
settlements,  the allocated  growth  and future  development  sites are primarily  to meet  local needs 
whilst  at the same  time ensuring  the future  sustainability  of the settlement. 
5.18 The villages  and hamlets  in Wyre Forest,  particularly  to the west of the River  Severn, 
are characterised  by close-knit  communities  that in many  places  retain  links with the traditional 
rural economy  as well as providing  some  limited  services.  Sites  beyond  development  boundaries 
generally  are less sustainable  as access  to local services  and employment  opportunities  tends 
to be poorer  and therefore  it is appropriate  that development  in the open  countryside  is restricted 
to proposals  which  are supportive  of more  specific  Local  Plan policies,  e.g. Policy  DM.10  – 
Rural  Employment. 
5.19 Maintaining  the identity  and integrity  of individual  settlements  is an important  issue  for 
local communities.  To the east of the River  Severn  this is achieved  by the West Midlands  Green 
Belt designation.  Green  Belts  serve  five purposes  (set out in the National  Planning  Policy 
Framework),  which  are: 
to check  the unrestricted  sprawl  of large  built up areas; 
to prevent  neighbouring  towns  merging  into one another; 
to assist  in safeguarding  the countryside  from encroachment; 
to preserve  the setting  and special  character  of historic  towns;  and 
to assist  in urban  regeneration,  by encouraging  the recycling  of derelict  and other  urban 
land. 
5.20 Locally , the Green  Belt continues  to serve  all the purposes  of national  policy  and the 
boundaries  are considered  to be strong  and enduring.  However , due to the exceptional 
circumstances  of an increased  housing  demand  coupled  with a reduced  amount  of brownfield 
9 Wyre Forest  District  Settlement  Hierarchy  Topic Paper  2018) 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 land and a very tightly  constrained  Green  Belt boundary  restricting  the ability  to develop 
sustainable  locations  the District  Council  considered  it necessary  to undertake  a Green  Belt 
Review  through  this Local  Plan Review  (NPPF  para 140).  Where  the Green  Belt is fundamental 
in preventing  the neighbouring  towns  from merging  (e.g. between  Bewdley  and Kidderminster 
along  the A456  corridor  and Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn  along  the A451  corridor), 
it will be particularly  important  to ensure  that the land remains  open. 
5.21 The nearest  sub-regional  centre  to Wyre Forest  District  is Worcester  which  has a 
sub-regional  function.  Additionally , particularly  in respect  of commuting,  there  are links with the 
southern  Black  Country  and Birmingham.  Within  the District  the largest  and most  important 
retail  and commercial  centre  is its administrative  centre,  Kidderminster , which  also provides  a 
focus  for public  services,  comparison  shopping,  etc. This strategy  will continue  to support  the 
role of Kidderminster  and will seek to facilitate  its further  regeneration  through  the redevelopment 
of such  key zones  as Lion Fields  (the Eastern  Gateway)  and Churchfields.   
5.22 The other  Main  Town centres  at Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  are smaller  and 
provide  a smaller  scale  and range  of retail  and other  services  typically  serving  their own 
settlement  and their hinterland  of smaller  settlements  and villages.  Centres  in the villages  and 
rural settlements  are again  smaller  and will typically  provide  only a limited  range  of day-to-day 
retail  and other  services. 
Policy  SP.3 - Kidderminster  town  as the strategic  centre  of the District 
Kidderminster  will continue  to be the strategic  centre  for the District  and its role in providing 
a focus  for new housing,  commercial,  employment,  retail,  office and leisure  development 
is to be enhanced.  New development  will focus  on the regeneration  opportunities  on the 
identified  sites within  and adjacent  to the town.  Two sustainable  strategic  sites are allocated 
(see Policy  SP.4). 
The future  development  needs  of Kidderminster  will be allocated  and implemented  through 
the Kidderminster  Site Allocations  policies  in Chapter  30 as well as the “ReW yre Renewed” 
Strategy . 
Development  proposals  which  help to promote  Kidderminster  as the tourism  'hub' of the 
District  will be encouraged  during  the plan period.  This includes  the provision  of supporting 
facilities  such  as sports  facilities,  hotels,  conferencing  facilities  and developments  that 
improve  the evening  / night  time economy  and cultural  offer of the town.  Where  the residual 
cumulative  impacts  of development  on the road network  are severe,  sustainable   transport 
links and infrastructure  to promote  ease  of access  to the Wyre Forest,  Stourport-on-Severn, 
Bewdley , West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park and Kidderminster  Railway  Station  will be 
sought,  where  practical  and viable. 
Wyre Forest  District 
33 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy Reasoned  Justification 
5.23 Kidderminster  is a former  carpet  manufacturing  town  which  has been,  and is still 
experiencing  economic  restructuring  as a result  of the decline  in activity  of this industry . 
Consequently , Kidderminster  faces  a number  of economic  challenges  and contains  areas  which 
experience  acute  deprivation.  The challenges  include  lower  than average  household  incomes, 
low skill levels  and poor educational  attainment. 
5.24 There  is great  potential  for regeneration  in Kidderminster . The Staffordshire  & 
Worcestershire  Canal  and River  Stour  both run through  the town  centre,  providing  a significant 
opportunity  to create  new waterside  destinations.  Whilst  much  of the deliverable  brownfield  land 
in the town  has now been  redeveloped,  Kidderminster  still benefits  from significant  areas  of 
brownfield  land suitable  for redevelopment  most  notably  Lionfields  (the Eastern  Gateway)  and 
Churchfields. 
5.25 As the District’ s strategic  centre  Kidderminster  has a unique  role within  the District.  There 
are key opportunities  to improve  the town's  tourism  and employment  roles,  boosted  by the 
Severn  Valley Railway , the West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park,  and the economic  success 
of the South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park.  Overall,  opportunities  to create  additional 
employment  and learning  opportunities,  improve  the natural  and built environment,  increase 
tourism  and provide  new housing,  through  regeneration  are all present  in Kidderminster . 
5.26 All new development  should  make  a positive  contribution  to the vitality  and viability  of 
the town  and support  the creation  of a safe,  attractive  and accessible  urban  environment  and 
improve  both the overall  mix of land uses  in the town  and its connectivity  to adjoining  areas. 
5.27 The development  of a diverse  evening/night  time economy  centred  on Kidderminster  is 
seen  as an important  element  in driving  the improvement  of this strategic  centre  and the wider 
District.  Careful  consideration  will be required  to determine  the number , type and scale  of 
activities  and uses  to ensure  that a rich, inclusive  and safe environment  is created. 
5.28 There  should  be sufficient  protection/provision  of outdoor  sports  facilities  as identified 
in the Playing  Pitch  Strategy . 
Policy  SP.4 - Strategic  Allocation  Sites 
The strategic  allocation  sites are defined  on the Policies  Map and will come  forward  in line 
with the detailed  requirements  expressed  by Policies  SP.LCV1,  SP.LCV2  and Policies 
SP.KEE1  - SP.KEE4. 
The strategic  allocation  sites are: 
a. Lea Castle  Village  (the ex-hospital  site at Lea Castle  and wider  site area)  - Policies 
SP.LCV1  and SP.LCV2; 
b. Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension  - Policies  SP.KEE1  - SP.KEE4. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 34 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 Reasoned  Justification 
5.29 In recognition  of the insuf ficient  amount  of sustainably  located  readily  available  land to 
accommodate  the necessary  housing  and employment  requirement  two well-designed  sustainable 
strategic  sites are allocated. 
5.30 In line with the NPPF  (Para  140) Wyre Forest  District  Council  has determined  the need 
for a review  of the Green  Belt within  the District  under  the exceptional  circumstances  provision. 
This is to specifically  accommodate  larger  scale  development  such  as new settlements  or major 
urban  extensions  and is necessary  due to the scale  of development  needs  identified  for the 
District  up until 2036. 
5.31 The housing  requirement  is 5,520  dwellings  for the plan period  plus an additional  487 
C2 Institutional  (e.g. care homes  / nursing  homes  bed spaces).  The Plan also allocates  in excess 
of the housing  requirement  by more  than 20% to allow  for sites that may not come  forward. 
5.32 The Plan allocates  an additional  2,097  dwellings  on brownfield  sites.  Together  with 
existing  completions  and commitments,  this means  that 49% of all housing  developed  in this 
Plan period  will be on brownfield  sites.  These  figures  include  600 dwellings  at Lea Castle 
ex-hospital  site (this takes  into account  viability  and flood  risk issues).  There  is limited  greenfield 
capacity  on suitable  and sustainable  sites to the west of the River  Severn. 
5.33 Therefore  to meet  the needs  of the growing  population  and ensure  that sufficient  high 
quality  accessible  land is available  for residential  and economic  development  the District  has 
two strategic  allocation  sites which  will require  the removal  of land from the Green  Belt. This 
will enable  the delivery  of planned  sustainable  urban  development  with accompanying  primary 
school,  local services  and infrastructure.  Lea Castle  Village  will also include  some  employment 
use. (Note  that the total Green  Belt land take for the Plan equates  to 2.1%  for all of the Green 
Belt site allocations  in the Plan) . 
5.34 The District  Council  will continue  to work  proactively  in these  locations  with existing 
landowners,  stakeholders  and other  agencies  to bring  forward  these  strategic  developments 
during  the plan period. 
Policy  SP.5 - Role  of Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  as Market  Towns 
1. Within  the District's  market  towns  of Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley , both of which 
have  Conservation  Areas  as their town  centres,  the following  development  proposals 
will be sought: 
a. Employment,  start-up  business  units  and commerce,  to provide  local employment 
opportunities  and enhance  economic  viability . 
b. Current  retail  provision  will be safeguarded  where  possible,  however , diversification 
proposals  will be assessed  against  their overall  positive  contribution  to the town 
centre. 
c. New retail  development  proposals  should  be appropriate  to the town's  position  in 
the District's  settlement  hierarchy . 
Wyre Forest  District 
35 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy d. Developments  which  provide  additional  community  and health  facilities  for the 
local area. 
e. Sustainable  transport  infrastructure  should  be enhanced  to ensure  ease  of access 
to the town's  services  and facilities,  particularly  from the surrounding  rural areas. 
Access  from the market  towns  to the higher  order  services  available  in 
Kidderminster  will also be improved  where  practical  and viable. 
f. There  will be some  Green  Belt release  to enable  the market  towns  to contribute 
to the housing  requirement  whilst  addressing  the need  for sustainability  and cost 
effective  infrastructure  provision  (see Chapters  33 and 34). 
g. Sufficient  protection/provision  of outdoor  sports  facilities. 
h. Development  within  the towns'  Conservation  Areas  must  preserve  or enhance 
those  areas,  the heritage  assets  contained  therein  and their settings. 
2. Stourport-on-Severn: 
a. Due to its role in the settlement  hierarchy  and mix of employment  and service 
opportunities,  Stourport-on-Severn  is expected  to make  an important  contribution 
to meeting  the District's  requirements  for new homes.  The focus  will be on existing 
brownfield  sites within  the urban  area and sustainable,  suitable  greenfield  sites 
such  as the site at Pearl  Lane  (Policy  SA.S4). 
b. Developments  which  will increase  the variety  and mix of the tourism  offer in the 
town  will be encouraged  and facilities  which  focus  on heritage  tourism,  particularly 
capitalising  on the historic  canal  basins,  will be especially  promoted. 
c. Development  within  the three  Conservation  Areas  should  preserve  or enhance 
those  areas. 
d. The allocations  for Stourport-on-Severn  are detailed  within  Chapter  33. 
3. Bewdley: 
a. Bewdley's  contribution  towards  the District's  housing  need  will be limited  to the 
development  of the allocated  sites for Bewdley  and development  which  ensures 
the long-term  vitality  and viability  of Bewdley . This reflects  the town's  conservation 
context  and the more  limited  availability  of jobs and services  within  the town.  Some 
limited  greenfield  development  will be permitted  to enable  this. 
b. The role of Bewdley  as a sustainable  tourist  destination  is to be enhanced,  with 
sustainable  transport  links to the Wyre Forest,  Severn  Valley Railway , West Midland 
Safari  and Leisure  Park and Kidderminster  Rail station  being  a particular  focus, 
where  practical  and viable. 
c. Development  within  the Bewdley  and Wribbenhall  Conservation  Areas  should 
preserve  or enhance  those  areas. 
d. The allocations  for Bewdley  are detailed  within  Chapter  34.  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 36 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 Reasoned  Justification 
5.35 Within  market  towns,  local people  and those  in the surrounding  rural hinterland,  should 
be able to buy most  things  they need  and have  sufficient  access  to housing,  jobs,  education 
and entertainment. 
5.36 The geography  of the District  means  that Kidderminster  is just 3 miles  from each  of the 
market  towns  with the potential  for good  public  transport  links between  them.  Therefore,  the 
need  for Bewdley  and Stourport-on-Severn  to provide  facilities  and services  should  be balanced 
with their proximity  to Kidderminster  and the services  it provides  in its function  as the strategic 
centre  of the District. 
5.37 There  should  be sufficient  protection/provision  of outdoor  sports  facilities  as identified 
in the Playing  Pitch  Strategy . 
Stourport-on-Severn 
5.38 With a population  of 20,000  Stourport-on-Severn  is a large  market  town  that is well 
served  by local amenities  such  as shops  and community  facilities.  It is relatively  well served  by 
public  transport,  although  some  outlying  housing  estates  have  poor access  to bus services. 
The town  provides  a good  level of existing  employment  opportunities. 
5.39 The town  has the potential  to accommodate  a significant  amount  of new development 
on brownfield  sites within  or adjacent  to the town  centre.  However , regeneration  will need  to be 
carefully  considered  in the context  of the town's  historic  character  and heritage  in addition  to 
the settlement  hierarchy . 
5.40 In Stourport-on-Severn  town  centre  congestion  is an issue  because  of the current  road 
layout,  pedestrian  arrangements  and lack of alternative  routes  (including  bridge  access  and 
capacity).  In respect  of future  development  in and around  the town  the strategic  transport 
infrastructure  in the town  is therefore  a key consideration.  Accessibility  to the town  centre  by 
alternative  modes  for residents  and visitors  alike is extremely  important  to the town's  future 
functionality  and viability . 
5.41 Stourport-on-Severn  has unique  origins  as a canal  town  and has five historic  basins 
which  have  recently  undergone  a major  restoration  programme.  The town  is also located  on 
the banks  of the River  Severn  which  has helped  it become  a popular  visitor  destination.  The 
town  is a particular  attraction  for day trippers,  especially  for people  from the Birmingham  and 
Black  Country  areas.  The tourism  offer of the town  has a great  potential  for generating  economic 
activity , but this has not been  fully utilised  in the past.  A key opportunity  is available  to promote 
Stourport-on-Severn's  history  as a canal  town  with its historic  basins  and take advantage  of its 
heritage  assets.  This would  help to enable  the town  to tap into new tourism  markets  and 
potentially  attract  a higher-spending,  longer-stay  visitor . 
Bewdley 
5.42 Bewdley  has a smaller  population  at around  9,000  but has a greater  interdependent 
relationship  with the surrounding  rural parishes. 
Wyre Forest  District 
37 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5.43 There  is a reasonable  level of service  provision  in the town  with shopping  and community 
facilities  to serve  the local population.  However , higher  order  services  and goods  are on offer 
in Kidderminster  and therefore  are available  within  a short  distance  from Bewdley . 
5.44 Employment  opportunities  are very limited  within  the town  with the majority  of workers 
having  to commute  out to the surrounding  areas. 
5.45 Like Stourport-on-Severn,  Bewdley  is also a popular  tourist  destination.  This is largely 
due to its attractive  and historic  Georgian  architecture,  its setting  on the River  Severn,  the West 
Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park and the Severn  Valley Railway  station  close  to the centre.  The 
town's  setting  within  the countryside  is also an important  factor  and the Wyre Forest  is located 
just on the town's  outskirts.  Therefore,  Bewdley  is well located  within  a tourist  setting  and 
provides  opportunities  for developing  sustainable  tourism. 
5.46 The ability  to accommodate  new development  on brownfield  sites within  or adjacent  to 
the town  centre  is limited  due to the heritage  setting  of the town  as well as its topography  and 
the Welch Gate  Air Quality  Management  Area.  Development  within  the town's  Conservation 
Area itself,  which  covers  most  of the town centre,  is especially  sensitive  and will need  to preserve 
or enhance  the special  character  and appearance  of the area.  There  are few development 
opportunities  within  the built environment  and conservation  is a priority . 
Policy  SP.6 - Role  of the existing  villages  and rural  areas 
1. Sustaining  Community  Facilities  and Services 
a. Developments  that provide  the rural community  with essential  facilities  and services 
will be supported  in principle. 
b. The network  of local groups  of shops  and public  houses  will be safeguarded  in 
order  to support  nearby  settlements  and reduce  the need  to travel. 
c. Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  will remain  the most  sustainable 
places  to provide  higher  order  services  and facilities  to the rural areas,  but access 
to them  by public  transport  should  be improved. 
d. Where  there  is a need  for new housing  in existing  villages  and rural settlements, 
priority  should  be given  to locations  which  are well connected  to higher  order 
settlements  and which  already  have  key services  and facilities. 
2. Providing  Housing  for Local  Need 
a. New residential  development  in the District's  existing  villages,  rural settlements 
and other  rural hamlets  will be to meet  local housing  needs,  as established  through 
the Housing  Needs  Study  and parish  surveys  (Policy  SP.11 - Rural  Exception 
Sites,  and Policy  DM.2  - Residential  Infill Development). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 38 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 3. The Rural  Economy 
a. The rural economy  will be supported  by promoting  development  which  contributes 
to rural employment  sectors  as well as encouraging  appropriate  farm diversification 
schemes. 
b. Development  proposals  will not be permitted  where  they would  be likely  to have 
direct  and significant  impact  on the District's  best and most  versatile  agricultural 
land. 
c. Historic  farmsteads  will be protected  from inappropriate  development  (for details 
refer to Policy  DM.23  and Policy  DM.29). 
d. The provision  of rural based  workspace  and live/work  units  will be permitted 
providing: 
i. the proposals  are small  scale  (i.e. not major  development); 
ii. that they are appropriate  to the character  of the area;   
iii. that they do not have  an adverse  impact  on the Green  Belt. 
Priority  will be placed  on the re-use  or replacement  of existing  rural buildings.   
The allocations  for the existing  villages  and rural areas  of Wyre Forest  are detailed 
within  Chapter  36.  
Policy  SA.PDL  identifies  allocations  for previously  developed  sites in the Green  Belt 
Reasoned  Justification 
5.47 Agriculture  is the predominant  land use within  the District's  rural areas.  The quality  of 
agricultural  land is generally  very high in the area running  from east and south  east of 
Kidderminster  to the District  boundary . There  are also significant  blocks  of high quality  land to 
the north  of Kidderminster  and around  Rock. 
5.48 Economic  and employment  opportunities  in rural areas  go beyond  the traditional  land 
based  and agricultural  sectors.  There  are great  opportunities  for sustainable  farm diversification, 
particularly  with regard  to the tourism  and leisure  sectors.  New employment  opportunity  sectors 
such  as creative  industries  and environmental  technologies  may also be available  in rural areas. 
The provision  of superfast  and ultrafast  broadband  in addition  to the availability  of mobile 
infrastructure  able to provide  2G, 3G, 4G and increasingly  5G coverage  will be essential  in 
developing  the economic  base  of the rural areas. 
5.49 Equestrian  activities  are also prominent  uses  in rural areas.  Commercial  equestrian 
development  in particular , can contribute  significantly  to the rural economy  and provide 
employment  for local people.  However , equine  related  development  will need  to be balanced 
with the potential  impact  on the landscape  and character  of the rural environment  and the 
continued  need  to preserve  the best and most  versatile  agricultural  land to enable  localised 
food production  in the future. 
Wyre Forest  District 
39 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 5 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5.50 However , the economic  development  of the District’ s rural areas  does  not need  to be 
at the expense  of environmental  protection  and enhancement  and must  be balanced  by the 
pressure  to regenerate  the adjacent  towns. 
5.51 Sustainable  living  is as important  in rural areas  as it is in urban  areas.  Measures  that 
encourage  working  practices  that cut down  on commuting  and improve  the work/life  balance 
should  be encouraged.  It is also important  to help establish  lifestyle  changes  that support  the 
local economy  and the sustainability  of the rural community . However , much  of the rural area 
is close  to the combined  urban  area of Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  and 
to the employment  opportunities  and services  they provide.  Therefore,  significant  numbers  of 
the rural population  will rely on these  centres  regularly  to access  these  facilities.  Transport  links 
between  the urban  and rural areas  should  be improved  to increase  the sustainability  of the 
relationship  between  the two areas. 
5.52 The Lea Castle  Village  (Policies  SP.LCV1  and SP.LCV2)  is not applicable  to Policy 
SP.6. 
Policies  Map 
5.53 Throughout  the Local  Plan,  reference  is made  to the Policies  Map.  This includes  statutory 
designations  for areas  such  as Green  Belt, Sites  of Special  Scientific  Interest  (SSSI)  and Nature 
Reserves.  It also includes  site specific  allocations  for residential,  employment,  retail  and 
community  uses.  The map makes  it easier  to identify  the major  areas  for change  as well as 
those  for protection. 
5.54 The Policies  Map and the maps  throughout  the Local  Plan use Ordnance  Survey  base 
maps  which  are Crown  Copy  right protected  (Ordnance  Survey  100018317). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 40 A Sustainable  Future  - Development  Strategy 5 6.1 The establishment  and maintenance  of Green  Belts  around  many  of England’ s main  urban 
areas  has long been  a part of national  planning  policy  designed  to strictly  control  development. 
The Green  Belt (GB)  within  the administrative  Area  of Wyre Forest  District  Council  is part of the 
larger  West Midlands  Green  Belt and was intended  to prevent  urban  sprawl,  restrict  the expansion 
of villages  and protect  the open  countryside  from the pressure  for development. 
Policy  SP.7 - Strategic  Green  Belt Review 
The District's  most  up-to-date  Green  Belt boundaries  are identified  on the Policies  Map. 
There  is a general  presumption  against  inappropriate  development  within  the Green  Belt, 
and such  development  will not be permitted  unless  very special  circumstances  exist. 
Development  proposals,  including  those  involving  previously  developed  land and buildings 
in the Green  Belt, will be assessed  in relation  to the relevant  national  planning  policy . 
The important  role of the District's  Green  Belt will be recognised  and protected,  with the 
majority  of new development  being  channelled  towards  the most  sustainable  Main  Towns 
of Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley , many  parts  of which  are bounded  by 
the Green  Belt. 
In accordance  with paragraph  140 of the National  Planning  Policy  Framework,  a number 
of changes  will be made  to the Green  Belt boundaries  to support  the strategic  development 
of Wyre Forest  through  this Plan.  The following  areas  will be removed  from the Green  Belt 
to accommodate  future  development  needs  and are shown  on the Policies  Map.  Where 
appropriate,  further  details  are provided  in Chapters   30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36: 
a. Changes  to the Green  Belt boundary  to enable  sustainable  development  at two strategic 
allocation  sites: 
i. to the north  of Kidderminster , to enable  the Lea Castle  Village  development. 
ii. the eastern  edge  of Kidderminster  urban  area. 
b. Changes  to the Green  Belt boundary  will also be made  at locations  around 
Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn,  Bewdley  and Blakedown  to enable  the development 
needs  for the District  to be met most  sustainably  and economically . 
c. The following  Areas  of Development  Restraint  (ADRs)  (see Site Allocations  and Policies 
Local  Plan,  adopted  2013)   are allocated  in accordance  with Local  Plan Policies  SA.K1 1 
and SA.S1 1: 
i. Hurcott  ADR  (land  between  A451  and Hurcott  village)  - green  gap to be maintained 
as per Policy  SA.K1 1; 
ii. Four Acres  Caravan  Park,  Stourport-on-Severn  (in accordance  with Policy  SA.S1 1). 
The Policies  Map also shows  the villages  that continue  to be included  in the Green  Belt 
('washed  over'  as per Policy  SP.2). These  villages  will be protected  from inappropriate 
development  due to the important  contribution  which  the open  character  of the village  makes 
Wyre Forest  District 
41 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 6 Strategic  Green  Belt Review to the openness  of the Green  Belt. However , limited  infilling  in these  locations  may be 
considered  appropriate  if in accordance  with Policy  DM.22,  Policy  DM.2  and NPPF  Green 
Belt policy . Any proposal  in these  locations  will be expected  to be of an appropriate  density 
to reflect  surrounding  properties  and should  not impact  negatively  on the openness  and 
character  of the wider  Green  Belt. 
Limited  affordable  housing  for local community  needs  in the Green  Belt will be supported 
on rural exception  sites where  the development  complies  with Policies  SP.10 (Affordable 
Housing  Provision)  and Policy  SP.11 (Addressing  Rural  Housing  Needs). 
Opportunities  to enhance  the beneficial  use of the Green  Belt and improve  public  access 
to Green  Belt areas  will be supported  in line with the National  Planning  Policy  Framework 
and Policy  DM.22  (Safeguarding  the Green  Belt). 
This policy  should  also be used  in conjunction  with Policy  SA.PDL  (Part  C of Plan),  which 
permits  certain  forms  of development  at identified  Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green 
Belt (as shown  on the Policies  Map). 
Reasoned  Justification 
6.2 The WFDC  Green  Belt was originally  determined  in the mid-1970s  and was subsequently 
confirmed  in detail  by the Wyre Forest  Urban  Areas  Local  Plan,  adopted  in 1989.  Subsequent 
Local  Plan Reviews  (1994,  2004  and 2010)  did not identify  the need  for any significant  changes 
although  some  limited  adjustments  around  a number  of the larger  villages  were  made. 
6.3 Within  the WFDC  administrative  area,  the current  extent  of the Green  Belt includes  all 
the land as far west as the River  Severn,  but excludes  the towns  of Kidderminster , 
Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  and the smaller  settlements  of Blakedown,  Cookley , Fairfield 
and Wilden.  There  are three  villages  included  within  the Green  Belt (i.e. washed  over by Green 
Belt).  These  three  villages  are Chaddesley  Corbett,  Wolverley  and Upper  Arley . 
6.4 Provision  for longer-term  development  was made  in the 1996  adopted  Local  Plan through 
the adoption  of a number  of Areas  of Development  Restraint  (ADRs).  ADRs  are areas  of land 
which  have  been  taken  out of the Green  Belt to meet  longer-term  housing  needs.  The ADRs 
are treated  as Green  Belt land until they are allocated  for development  through  the plan-making 
process.  The existing  ADRs  are as follows: 
Land  between  A451  and Hurcott  Village,  Kidderminster 
Land  off Hayes  Road,  Fairfield 
Land  off Lowe  Lane,  Fairfield 
Land  off Kimberlee  Avenue,  Cookley 
Land  off Wilden  Top Road,  Stourport-on-Severn 
Four Acres  Caravan  Park,  Stourport-on-Severn 
6.5 With the exception  of the Hurcott  ADR  and the Four Acres  Caravan  Park ADR,  the current 
ADR  sites will be maintained  as Reserved  Housing  Sites  (Safeguarded  Land)  as per Policy 
SP.8. The northern  area of the Hurcott  ADR has already  been  developed  for housing  the southern 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 42 Strategic  Green  Belt Review 6 area of the site is protected  by a green  gap as per Policy  SA.K1 1 'Land  at Stourbridge  Road'. 
The Four Acres  ADR  site at Stourport  is currently  being  used  as a Caravan  Park providing 
mobile  homes.  The land (as shown  on the Policies  Map)  is allocated  as a caravan  park as Policy 
SA.S1 1. The other  ADR  sites are greenfield  and will remain  as Safeguarded  Land  (Policy  SP.8). 
They  will be considered  for development  either  through  the Neighbourhood  Plan process  or the 
next Local  Plan review . This is to give local communities  that are preparing  Neighbourhood 
Plans  a greater  influence  on the type of development  that takes  place  in these  areas  in the 
future. 
Green  Belt Review 
6.6 The important  role of the Green  Belt is fully recognised.  The NPPF  (para  137) states  that 
"the fundamental  aim of Green  Belt policy  is to prevent  urban  sprawl  by keeping  land permanently 
open;  the essential  characteristics  of Green  Belts  are their openness  and their permanence." 
The Green  Belt serves  five purposes  as set out at paragraph  5.19. 
6.7 The NPPF  (para  140) states  that "Once  established,  Green  Belt boundaries  should  only 
be altered  where  exceptional  circumstances  are fully evidenced  and justified,  through  the 
preparation  or updating  of plans.  Strategic  policies  should  establish  the need  for any changes 
to Green  Belt boundaries,  having  regard  to their intended  permanence  in the long term,  so they 
can endure  beyond  the plan period." 
6.8 Whilst  the District  Council  has been  able to adopt  subsequent  Local  Plans  without  requiring 
incursions  into the Green  Belt or requiring  the development  of ADRs  to meet  development 
needs,  the time has come  for the District  Council  to look beyond  the boundaries  of its urban 
areas  for sites to meet  the District's  development  needs. 
6.9 The Local  Plan seeks  to minimise  the impact  of development  upon  the Green  Belt. 
However , it was concluded  during  the Local  Plan Review  that there  were  exceptional 
circumstances  which  justified  a review  of the Green  Belt boundary . The Green  Belt boundary 
was therefore  amended  for the need  to locate  development  to the most  sustainable  settlements 
and locations  where  there  is easy  access  to a range  of existing  services  and facilities  and 
supporting  infrastructure. 
6.10 The Strategic  Review  of the Green  Belt in Wyre Forest  District  was justified  for the 
following  two key reasons: 
i. National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF)  makes  it clear  that it is necessary  for the 
evidence  base  for all Local  Plans  to be up-to-date.  As stated  above  the Wyre Forest  Green 
Belt was instituted  in the mid-1970s  and has not been  subjected  to fundamental  review 
since.  The District  Council  therefore  needs  to provide  up-to-date  evidence  to support  its 
Green  Belt policies.  To achieve  this it was necessary  to perform  a review  to demonstrate 
that the Green  Belt boundary  within  the District  remain  robust  and defensible  so that it can 
effectively  fulfil the five purposes  set out in the NPPF . The NPPF  requires  that Green  Belt 
boundary  reviews  must  be established  through  strategic  policies  during  the preparation  or 
updating  of plans. 
ii. Wyre Forest  has been  successful  in utilising  previously  developed  land to meet  its housing 
and employment  land requirements  in previous  adopted  Local  Plans.  However , in this Local 
Wyre Forest  District 
43 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 6 Strategic  Green  Belt Review Plan period  (up to 2036)  previously  developed  land on its own will not be sufficient  to 
accommodate  all development  needs.  It will therefore  be necessary  to ensure  that the most 
appropriate  and sustainable  locations  are utilised  for future  development  whilst  at the same 
time protecting  the future  role and functions  of the Green  Belt in a robust  and thoroughly 
evidenced  way. This will require  some  strategic  adjustments  to the Green  Belt boundary . 
6.11 A Strategic  Green  Belt Study  (AMEC  2016)  and a more  detailed  Second  Stage  Green 
Belt Study  (AMEC  2017,  and updated  in 2018)  form that robust  evidence  base.  These  studies 
demonstrate  that across  the District  the Green  Belt fulfils  its intended  strategic  purpose  as part 
of the West Midlands  Green  Belt with many  instances  of more  than one Green  Belt purpose 
being  fulfilled. 
6.12 These  studies  have  formed  a key part of the evidence  base  in deriving  the policy  options 
and decisions  in the preparation  of the Strategic,  Development  Management  and Allocations 
Policies  contained  within  this document.  It is important  to note that the NPPF  also requires  the 
consideration  of whether  the Green  Belt boundary  will remain  appropriate  to meet  the District's 
needs  beyond  2036. 
Wyre Forest  District  Exceptional  Circumstances 
6.13 The Wyre Forest  District  Housing  Need  Study  (2018)  highlights  Wyre Forest  District's 
housing  need  to be at least  5,520  homes  to 2036  (based  on 276 dwellings  per annum).  Having 
undertaken  a comprehensive  review  of the Green  Belt together  with a full analysis  of other 
relevant  evidence,  it has become  clear  that the Council  cannot  physically  accommodate  all of 
this need  within  its existing  urban  areas. 
6.14 The NPPF  is clear  that housing  need  (market  and affordable)  must  be met. Through  the 
findings  of the Sustainability  Appraisal  and in taking  these  findings  on board,  the Council  has 
considered  realistic  alternative  options  through  its Local  Plan review  and the Duty to Co-operate. 
Existing  urban  areas  and non-Green  Belt land has been  considered,  but existing  Green  Belt 
land is required  to meet  the District's  housing  needs,  including  identified  needs  for affordable 
housing. 
6.15 The District's  tight boundary  close  to its main  towns  means  that potential  employment 
land supply  is limited.  The District  must  provide  employment  land to stimulate  economic  growth, 
however  to promote  a balance  of need  and supply  Green  Belt land must  be utilised. 
6.16 Without  the release  of land for development  that is currently  in the Green  Belt, it is highly 
unlikely  the District  would  be in a position  to demonstrate  a continuous  five year supply  of 
housing  land or a continuous  supply  of employment  land over the plan period.  The need  for 
housing  in general  and affordable  housing  in particular , are matters  to be given  very substantial 
weight.  Paragraph  149(f)  of the NPPF  confirms  that affordable  housing  is an issue  of sufficient 
weight  for it potentially  to be an exception  to normal  Green  Belt policy . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 44 Strategic  Green  Belt Review 6 Policy  SP.8 - Reserved  Housing  Sites  in the Green  Belt 
1. The areas  of Reserved  Housing  Sites  (Safeguarded  Land)  comprise  the following  sites 
and are shown  on the Policies  Map. 
a. Land  off Hayes  Road,  Fairfield  ; 
b. Land  off Lowe  Lane,  Fairfield  ; 
c. Land  off Kimberlee  Avenue,  Cookley  ; 
d. Land  off Wilden  Top Road,  Wilden  ; 
e. Lawnswood,  Cookley . 
Any development  of these  sites will be subject  to consideration  through  a full or partial 
review  of this Local  Plan or through  a Neighbourhood  Plan process.  In the interim 
period,  proposals  for development  will be assessed  against  the Green  Belt policies  of 
the Development  Plan.  An ecological  appraisal  of the site will also be required  where 
necessary  to demonstrate  no net loss of biodiversity  (in accordance  with the GI policies 
in this Plan). 
2. If the Council  is unable  to meet  the NPPF  requirement  of being  able to demonstrate  a 
5 year supply  of land for housing  or where  the Housing  Delivery  Test indicates  that 
housing  delivery  was substantially  below  the housing  requirement  over the previous 
three  years,  then sites allocated  as 'Reserved  Housing  Sites'  within  the adopted  Local 
Plan,  will be considered  for development  if the applicant  can demonstrate  why the site 
should  be released  in advance  of other  allocated  sites within  this Plan or prior to the 
completion  of any future  Local  Plan review , including  consideration  of the harm  that 
might  arise  by its early  release  and submission  of Very Special  Circumstances. 
Reasoned  Justification 
6.17 The NPPF  sets the approach  to defining  the Green  Belt boundaries.  Its purpose  is to 
help ensure  that the Green  Belt (as defined  in this Plan)  endures  beyond  the Plan period  and 
that defensible  boundaries  are maintained. 
6.18 Paragraph  143 of the NPPF  expressly  mentions  the opportunity  to safeguard  land within 
the Green  Belt as part of a Local  Plan.  It is not however  allocated  for development  at the present 
time and is instead  identified  for consideration  through  future  Plan reviews.  As such,  planning 
permission  for the permanent  development  of safeguarded  land will only be granted  following 
a Local  Plan review  or Neighbourhood  Plan which  proposed  the development.  For clarity , in 
this Local  Plan 'safeguarded  sites'  are referred  to as 'Reserved  Housing  Sites'.  Reserved  Housing 
Sites  are areas  of land which  have  been  taken  out of the Green  Belt to meet  longer-term  housing 
needs.  They  are treated  as Green  Belt land until they are allocated  for development  through 
the plan making  process. 
6.19 The NPPF  requires  local planning  authorities  to demonstrate  a five-year  supply  of 
deliverable  housing  sites.  If the Council  is unable  to demonstrate  a 5 year supply  of land for 
housing,  then sites allocated  as 'Reserved  Housing  Sites'  within  the adopted  Local  Plan will 
Wyre Forest  District 
45 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 6 Strategic  Green  Belt Review provide  the first option  to consider  for development  if sites are not available  to meet  the desired 
requirement  in other , sequentially  preferable  locations.  The applicant  will need  to demonstrate 
why the site should  be released  in advance  of the completion  of the Local  Plan review , including 
consideration  of the harm  that might  arise  from its early  release.  This is to allow  flexibility  in the 
Local  Plan if a 5 year housing  land supply  cannot  be demonstrated.  Inappropriate  development 
on non-allocated  sites within  the Green  Belt will not be supported. 
6.20 The Council  considers  this flexible  approach  to adapt  to rapid  change  will support 
sustainable  development,  support  on-going  commitment  to Duty to Co-operate,  and assist  the 
long term protection  and management  of the Green  Belt in the District. 
6.21 The Council  would  encourage  early  pre-application  discussions  for any proposals  on 
Reserved  Housing  Sites. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 46 Strategic  Green  Belt Review 6 7.1 The 2018  Housing  Need  Study  has evidenced  the overall  requirement  for 276 new 
dwellings  per annum  over the new plan period.  This would  total 5,520  new dwellings  (before 
discounting  those  already  built or granted  permission  since  2016)  plus 487 C2 Institutional 
bedspaces  (e.g. residential  care homes)  over the whole  plan period.   The policies  contained  in 
this Chapter  set out how new housing  types  will be delivered  within  the District  in accordance 
with the overarching  Development  Strategy  policies  at Section  5. They  also address  site provision 
for gypsies,  travellers  and travelling  showpeople  during  the new plan period. 
7.2 2011 Census  migration  data suggests  that 66.1%  of all household  moves  are within  the 
Wyre Forest  District  area and that 59.1%  of residents  in employment  work  within  the District. 
Of the individuals  who work  in the District,  74.4%  also live within  Wyre Forest . Therefore  Wyre 
Forest  is a largely  self contained  Housing  Market  Area.  A review  of market  signals  data 
undertaken  in 2016/17  suggests  that the Housing  Market  in this area is relatively  stable. 
7.3 The Housing  White  Paper  (February  2017)  has set out more  specific  requirements  for 
housing  types  to encourage  greater  delivery  of housing  and to promote  home  ownership.  National 
Housing  Policy  focuses  on building  more  affordable  housing;  improving  the quality  of rented 
housing;  helping  more  people  to buy a home  and providing  housing  support  for vulnerable 
people.  Policies  within  the Local  Plan will be required  to take account  of this and to set out a 
proactive  approach  to delivery  to meet  specific  needs. 
Policy  SP.9 - Housing  Density  & Mix 
A minimum  annual  average  target  of 276 new dwellings  will be delivered  during  the plan 
period  to 2036.     
New housing  developments  must  be well designed  and address  local housing  needs 
incorporating  a range  of different  types,  tenures  and sizes  of housing  to create  mixed 
communities. 
Table 7.0.1  provides  an indicative  view on the overall  mix of housing  which  may be required. 
Actual  mix of housing  will be influenced  by the context  of the site, the market  needs  and 
the most  up-to-date  housing  needs  specific  to the location. 
Table 7.0.1  Suggested  dwelling  mix for 276 units  by market  and affordable  dwellings 
(including  all types  of housing  need) 
 Affordable  Market  Unit size 
 23 (33.3%)  24 (12%)  One bedroom 
 23 (33.3%)  87 (42%)  Two bedroom 
 23 (33.3%)  96 (46%)  Three  + bedroom 
69 (100%) 207 (100%) Total 
Source:  Derived  from Table 7.6 Housing  Need  Study  (arc4,  September  2018).  Please  note 
this data will be subject  to regular  review 
Wyre Forest  District 
47 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live The make-up  of individual  developments,  their design  and density  will be in sympathy  with 
the development  context  and existing  neighbouring  development.  It is anticipated  that new 
brownfield  and greenfield  developments  will have  a minimum  density  of 35 dwellings  per 
hectare,  unless  it can be shown  that there  are strong  reasons  why this would  be in conflict 
with the development  context  and existing  neighbouring  development.  Individual  site 
characteristics  may mean  that this level of density  is not achievable  on all greenfield 
developments  and this will need  to be robustly  justified  and evidenced  by the applicant  in 
relation  to housing  needs  and local context. 
For new housing  developments  in the district,  an indicative  guide  of densities  expected  is 
as follows: 
a. within  Kidderminster  town  centre,  new development  will be expected  to secure  housing 
densities  of 70 dwellings  per hectare.  In areas  adjacent  to the town  centre  and the 
railway  station,  new development  should  incorporate  housing  densities  of at least  50 
dwellings  per hectare.*   
b. within  Stourport-on-Severn  town centre  new development  should  meet  housing  densities 
of 50 dwellings  per hectare*.   
c. within  Bewdley  and the rural areas  new developments  should  meet  housing  densities 
of 35 dwellings  per hectare.*   
 *There  may be circumstances  where  applying  these  indicative  density  requirements  will 
not be appropriate  due to the character  and surroundings  of the proposed  site.  
Reasoned  Justification 
7.4 The Local  Plan needs  to plan positively  for a mix of housing  based  on an assessment  of 
the population  that will live in the District  both now and in the future.  Housing  mix refers  to both 
the size of property  (number  of bedrooms)  and the type of housing  – whether  detached, 
semi-detached,  terraced  or apartments.  Housing  completions  over the last 9 years  within  the 
District  have  provided  a good  mix of house  types  and sizes. 
7.5 Within  the District,  71.23%  of dwellings  are owner  occupied,  14.44%  are social  rented 
and 14.33%  are private  rented.  The 2016  OAHN  Report  undertook  an analysis  of stakeholder 
feedback  into housing  priorities  for the District.  This is set out in the table  below: 
Table 7.0.2  Ranking  of priorities  by stakeholders 
Percentage High  Housing  Priorities 
75 Properties  Designed  for Older  People 
63 Affordable  Homes  to Rent 
44 Affordable  Homes  to Buy 
40 Properties  for People  with Specialist  Needs 
31 Improving  Quality  of Existing  Stock 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 48 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 Percentage High  Housing  Priorities 
12 Building  Open  Market  Homes 
6 Executive  Housing 
NB: Percentages  do not add up to 100%  since  respondents  were  permitted  to nominate  more 
than one priority 
7.6 Analysis  (arc4,  September  2018)  indicates  a particular  requirement  for the development 
of 2 and 3 bedroom  market  dwellings  and a mix of 1, 2 and 3+ affordable  dwellings.  The 
affordable  dwellings  data is derived  from the Housing  Register  which  restricts  people  to housing 
need  / housing  benefit  eligibility  rather  than housing  aspirations  and so the Council  would  seek 
to provide  a higher  ratio of 2 and 3 bedroom  properties  to meet  current  and future  housing 
requirements. 
7.7 This broadly  accords  with the findings  of stakeholder  consultation  which  suggests  that 
there  is a mix of size and tenure  needed  across  the District  to support  a spectrum  of needs, 
cater  for demand  and attract  people  to the area. 
7.8 In the preparation  of the April 2017  Objectively  Assessed  Housing  Needs 
study , stakeholders  were  asked  to identify  what  types  of housing  they thought  should  be built. 
The following  were  mentioned: 
larger  affordable  family  homes; 
two- and three-bedroom  homes  for families; 
executive  homes; 
housing  for the elderly  including  bungalows  and accessible  and adaptable  dwellings  M4(2) 
of the Building  Regulations  (2010),  in addition  to extra  care schemes; 
specialist  housing  to support  specific  household  groups  identified  as in need;  and 
smaller  one bedroom  flats to rent. 
7.9 The NPPF  emphasises  the need  to set minimum  standards  of density  for cities  and towns 
as part of the Local  Plan,  and in particular  it establishes  that the minimum  standard  should  be 
a significant  uplift  in average  density . The 35 dwellings  per hectare  standard  meets  this 
requirement.  This standard  is considered  viable  for most  development  on greenfield  and 
brownfield  sites.   Different  density  standards  could  be supported  where  necessary  to ensure 
the development  is in sympathy  with the development  context  and existing  neighbouring 
development. 
7.10 Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn  provide  a good  range  of jobs and services  and 
the opportunities  for accessing  the public  transport  network  within  these  urban  areas  are higher . 
The higher  density  levels  indicated  for these  towns  reflect  their roles  within  the settlement 
hierarchy  and will help to support  existing  public  transport  infrastructure  into the future.  The 
indicative  residential  density  levels  for Bewdley  and the rural areas  reflect  the more  limited 
opportunities  to access  infrastructure  and services  within  these  parts  of the district. 
Wyre Forest  District 
49 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live Policy  SP.10 - Affordable  Housing  Provision 
1. Level  of Provision 
A minimum  annual  average  target  of 90 affordable  dwellings  will be delivered  during  the 
plan period  to 2036. 
Affordable  housing  provision  of a minimum  of 25% on major  development  sites or on sites 
within  designated  rural areas  comprising  more  than 5 dwellings  will generally  be required. 
Where  proposals  do not meet  this requirement,  a Viability  Assessment  should  be submitted 
to the Council  but only where  assumptions  depart  from the Local  Plan Viability  Assessment, 
as per Policy  DM.1,  Financial  Viability , in the Local  Plan.  Where  viability  assessments  show 
that the developer  will be unable  to meet  all policy  requirements  on site, prioritisation  of 
infrastructure  requirements  have  been  agreed  so that the provision  of affordable  housing 
is not always  reduced  first from developers’  obligations.  This will be site specific  as each 
site will bring  forward  its own individual  and specific  requirements.  This is in line with the 
current  PPG  on Viability . 
If a development  scheme  comes  forward  which  is below  these  thresholds  and thus does 
not require  the provision  of affordable  housing,  but the scheme  is followed  by an obviously 
linked  subsequent  development  scheme  at any point  where  the original  permission  remains 
extant,  or up to 5 years  following  completion  of the first scheme,  then,  if the combined  total 
of dwellings  provided  by the first scheme  and the subsequent  scheme/s  provide  10 or more 
(or the area of the site of the first scheme  and the subsequent  scheme/s  is 0.5 hectares  or 
more),  then an affordable  housing  provision  of a minimum  of 25% will be enforced,  with 
the precise  level of affordable  housing  to be provided  being  ‘back  dated’  to include  the 
earlier  scheme(s). 
2. Vacant  Building  Credit 
Vacant  Building  Credit  will apply  to brownfield  land where  empty  or redundant  buildings 
which  have  not been  abandoned  are being  reused  or redeveloped.  In applying  Vacant 
Building  Credit  the District  Council  will give consideration  to the following  points: 
a. The building  is not in use at the time the application  is submitted. 
b. The building  is not covered  by an extant  permission  for a materially  similar  development, 
or a permission  for a materially  similar  development  expired  within  six months  of the 
date of submission  of the application. 
c. The building  has not been  made  vacant  for the sole purpose  of redevelopment. 
d. Planning  applications  that seek  to utilise  Vacant  Building  Credit  as part of any proposal 
will be required  to provide  evidence  to demonstrate  eligibility .  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 50 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 3. Tenure  Split 
An indicative  tenure  split of 65% rented  (primarily  social  rent) and 35% affordable  housing 
for sale tenure(s)  (including  shared  ownership)  will be sought  for affordable  housing  provision 
on new sites.  The exact  split will be determined  on a site by site basis  based  on housing 
need  in an area at the time of an application  and viability  (if relevant). 
4. Affordable  Housing  led schemes 
On Registered  Provider-led  developments  which  would  predominantly  deliver  affordable 
housing  but still need  some  enabling  market  housing  to make  the site viable,  the number , 
tenure  and type of units  will be agreed  on a site by site basis  taking  into account  housing 
needs  in the area.  The number  of enabling  dwellings  should  not be higher  than the number 
of affordable  dwellings  and would  not normally  exceed  more  than 20% of the overall  number . 
5. Build  to Rent  Schemes 
The District  Council  will support  the development  of Build  to Rent  proposals  which  will offer 
a mixture  of houses  at market  rent and Affordable  Private  Rent,  aimed  at lower  to middle 
income  households.  Such  schemes  should  demonstrate  that they have  fully considered 
the incorporation  of a proportion  of homes  to be made  available  at an Affordable  Private 
Rent.  They  should  also offer security  of tenure  through  tenancy  agreements  of 3 years  or 
more,  where  possible.   
6. Entry  Level  Exception  Sites 
The District  Council  will work  with the Town and Parish  Councils,  Community  Led Housing 
Groups,  Registered  Providers  and Neighbourhood  Planning  Forums  to identify  appropriate 
sites for entry-level  exception  sites.  Such  schemes  will be subject  to the following  criteria: 
a. The site provides  entry-level  homes  suitable  for first time buyers  (or those  looking  to 
rent).   
b. The site is adjacent  to the existing  settlement. 
c. The number , size, type,  mix and tenure  of dwellings  must  not exceed  the extent  of 
identified  local need. 
d. The size and design  of the development  should  be sympathetic  to the character  and 
appearance  of the settlement  and the surrounding  landscape,  and it should  have  regard 
to any local design  policies  and standards. 
e. Any enabling  market  housing  required  to make  the development  of affordable  dwellings 
on the site viable  must  be accompanied  by a robust  viability  assessment  (open  book) 
in order  to justify  the required  enabling  development.  The number  of dwellings  should 
not be higher  than the number  of affordable  dwellings  and would  not normally  exceed 
more  than 20% of the overall  number . 
Wyre Forest  District 
51 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live Reasoned  Justification 
7.11 The definition  of Affordable  Housing,  Build  to Rent  and Affordable  Private  Rent  is 
consistent  with the National  Planning  Policy  Framework. 
7.12 The Wyre Forest  Housing  Need  Study  (September  2018)  establishes  an affordable 
housing  need  of 158 dwellings  per annum  over the new plan period.  However  it could  render 
the plan unviable  to expect  this level of affordable  housing  delivery  and this level is unrealistic 
in light of delivery  in recent  years.  Over  the period  April 2010  to September  2015,  Council  data 
indicates  a total of 521 affordable  dwellings  have  been  built – an annual  average  of 96 affordable 
dwellings.  The anticipated  future  supply  of affordable  homes  over the next five years  will be 
around  90 per year. 
7.13 Analysis  undertaken  suggests  that for open  market  housing  rental  within  the District  the 
minimum  income  required  is £23,280  for lower  quartile  renting.  For house  purchase,  an annual 
income  of £33,429  is required  for entry  level house  prices.  The following  table  sets out the 
affordability  ratios  (based  on 3.5 x household  income  ratios)  across  the District  for housing 
products  (taken  from the Wyre Forest  Housing  Need  Study , October  2018). 
Table 7.0.3  Affordability  ratios  across  the District  (based  on 3.5 
household  income  ratios) 
% of District  Population  who can 
afford Housing  Type/Product 
40.0 Median  House  Prices 
16.5 Average  House  Prices 
43.4 Lower  quartile  House  Prices 
42.9%  and 56.7% Shared  Ownership  (50%  and 25%) 
63.0 Help to Buy 
59.8 Median  rent 
43.8 Average  rent 
66.3 Lower  quartile  rent 
70.8 Affordable  rent 
77.6 Social  rent 
7.14 Evidence  suggests  that there  is a significant  need  for affordable  housing  within  the 
District.  In particular , the table  above  demonstrates  that more  rental  properties  are required, 
with the greatest  need  being  for social  rent. The current  level of housing  need,  as evidenced  in 
the Housing  Need  Study , supports  the Council  in having  a preference  for social  rented  units 
but the inclusion  of affordable  rent and affordable  housing  for sale tenures  within  the overall 
affordable  housing  mix will be sought  in line with the NPPF  and Homes  England  funding  regime. 
This will need  to be delivered  through  a combination  of policy  measures  and proposals  including 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 52 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 100%  provision  of affordable  housing  on sites (including  exception  sites)  and Section  106 
provision  as part of the overall  mix on sites over 10 dwellings  or above  0.5 hectare,  according 
to the NPPF  definition  of major  development  and sites within  the designated  rural area. 
7.15 The District  is required  to set an overall  minimum  target  for the Wyre Forest  District  area 
for the amount  of affordable  housing  to be provided  per annum.  This target  should  take account 
of local assessment  of need  and also be subject  to viability  assessment  to ensure  that it is 
deliverable.  Viability  testing  has suggested  that a minimum  figure  of 25% affordable  housing 
provision  on new sites would  be appropriate  for the area.  The past annual  average  delivery  of 
83 affordable  dwellings  would  suggest  that it may be more  appropriate  to set a target  of 90 per 
annum,  particularly  with the Government’ s new emphasis  on promoting  schemes  for affordable 
rent and other  intermediate  tenures. 
7.16 The District  Council  supports  the reuse  and redevelopment  of brownfield  sites and the 
reuse  of vacant  buildings  for housing.  Acknowledging  that redevelopment  of vacant  buildings 
incur  additional  costs  compared  to greenfield  site development  of the same  size and typology , 
the District  aims  to implement  the Vacant  Building  Credit  methodology  established  in the NPPF 
and PPG.  The Policy  outlines  the requirement  to define  a vacant  building,  as opposed  to a 
building  made  vacant  for the sole purpose  of development  and to an abandoned  building,  two 
situations  where  the Vacant  Building  Credit  does  not apply  according  to the NPPF  and PPG. 
7.17 The Housing  Need  Study  evidence  suggests  an overall  tenure  split of 65% rented 
(including  social  rent) and 35% affordable  housing  for sale tenure  dwellings.  It is therefore 
recommended  that a 65% rented  and 35% affordable  housing  for sale tenure  split is appropriate 
for affordable  housing  provision.  According  to the Housing  Need  Study  22% of households  in 
the district  can not afford affordable  housing  at social  rent levels  and 29% of households  cannot 
afford affordable  housing  at affordable  rent levels.  The Council  will therefore  seek  social  rent 
as the dominant  tenure  type within  the 65% split. 
Policy  SP.11 - Addressing  Rural  Housing  Needs 
The provision  of residential  development  to meet  specific  local needs  within  the District’ s 
designated  rural settlements  will be encouraged.  Residential  development  will be permitted 
where  it is in accordance  with the relevant  rural development  or Green  Belt policies  as 
contained  within  the Local  Plan.  Residential  and Community-Led  Housing  schemes  that 
take account  of local housing  needs  on windfall  sites will be positively  considered  within 
the rural areas.  Housing  should  be located  where  it will maintain  or enhance  the vitality  of 
rural communities  and within  the settlement  boundary . 
1. Rural  Exception  Sites 
The District  Council  will work  closely  with the Parish  Councils,  Registered  Providers, 
Community  Led Housing  Groups  and Neighbourhood  Planning  Forums  to identify  appropriate 
sites for rural exception  schemes  where  there  will be an expectation  to provide  100% 
affordable  housing  of a size, type and tenure  to meet  local housing  needs.  Such  schemes 
will be subject  to the following  criteria: 
Wyre Forest  District 
53 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live a. The provision  of affordable  housing  must  remain  so in perpetuity  in agreement  with 
the Registered  Provider  but where  legislation  prevents  this from happening  then 
agreement  must  be reached  with the Registered  Provider  to find a replacement  unit if 
the original  property  is sold. 
b. The number , size, type,  mix and tenure  of dwellings  must  not exceed  the extent  of 
identified  local need. 
c. The scale  of the scheme  should  be appropriate  to the size and character  of the 
settlement  and must  not significantly  damage  the character  of the settlement  or any 
surrounding  valued  landscape. 
d. The site should  be accessible  to local services  and facilities. 
e. Any enabling  market  housing  required  to make  the development  of affordable  dwelling 
on the site viable  must  be accompanied  by a robust  viability  assessment  in order  to 
justify  the required  enabling  development.  The number  of enabling  market  dwellings 
should  not be higher  than the number  of affordable  dwellings  and would  normally  be 
expected  to be up to 20% of the overall  number . 
2. Rural  Workers  Dwellings 
Applications  for rural workers’  dwellings  will be permitted  where  it can be clearly 
demonstrated  that: 
a. There  is a clear  and established  existing  functional  need. 
b. The need  relates  to a full time rural worker  who is employed  locally  in livestock 
management,  agriculture/agricultural  contracting  or forestry . 
c. The proposed  dwelling  is of a size commensurate  with the functional  requirement  and 
need  of the worker ’s household. 
d. Wherever  possible,  the dwelling  is sited  within,  and designed  in relation  to the main 
building  complex  where  the worker  works,  or a nearby  group  of dwellings. 
Where  permission  is given  for such  dwellings,  occupation  of the dwelling  will be restricted 
by condition  to a person  solely  employed  in the locality  in livestock  management, 
agriculture/agricultural  contracting  or forestry , or a widow  or widower  of such  a person,  and 
any resident  dependants.  The removal  of an occupancy  condition  will only be permitted 
where  it has been  demonstrated  that there  is no longer  a need  for the unit to be occupied 
by a person  employed  locally  in livestock  management,  agriculture/agricultural  contracting 
or forestry , or by a widow  or widower  of such  person  and any resident  dependants.  Any 
application  for the removal  of an occupancy  condition  should  include  evidence  to 
demonstrate  that the dwelling  with the occupancy  condition  in place  has been  actively 
marketed  to rural workers  or potential  rural workers  employed  locally  for a period  of 12 
months,  at a price  which  reflects  the existence  of an occupancy  condition,  and that no 
financially  viable  interest  has been  expressed  from within  the District  or its adjoining  parishes. 
3. Replacement  Dwellings  in the Open  Countryside 
The replacement  of a permanent  existing  lawful  dwelling  will be permitted  in the following 
circumstances: 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 54 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 a. The dwelling  is subject  to residential  use and has not been  abandoned. 
b. The replacement  dwelling  is in the same  or less prominent  position  as the original  with 
curtilage  only being  amended  if required  by re-siting,  landscape  enhancement,  vehicular 
safety  or neighbour  amenity . 
c. The replacement  dwelling  should  not be materially  larger  than the one it replaces.  In 
this respect  the District  Council  will apply  the following  size criteria; 
i. If the dwelling  is in its ‘original’  form – the existing  size plus 20% floorspace 
increase; 
ii. If the dwelling  has been  extended  beyond  its original  form – the existing  size. 
When  considering  comparisons  in size, the District  Council  will have  particular  regard 
to floorspace,  volume  and height. 
The terms  ‘original’  form refers  to the floorspace,  volume,  and height  of the building 
as it was originally  built,  or as existed  on 1st July 1948.  The term 'existing'  size refers 
to the floorspace,  volume  and height  of the existing  dwelling. 
In respect  of all of the categories  contained  within  this Policy  the costs  of any independent 
assessment  that is required  will be met by the applicant. 
Reasoned  Justification 
7.18 The District’ s rural areas  have  some  of the most  expensive  house  prices  within  the 
District,  which  means  that many  local families  who wish to remain  are priced  out of the market. 
In addition,  more  elderly  residents  may wish to downsize  to smaller  properties  and bungalows 
which  in turn will release  housing  opportunities  for families.  The Housing  Need  Study  (October 
2018)  demonstrates  significant  affordability  issues  relating  to house  purchase  in all of the 
parishes.  This is most  marked  within  the designated  rural parishes  of Broome,  Chaddesley 
Corbett,  Churchill  & Blakedown,  Kidderminster  Foreign,  Ribbesford,  Rock,  Rushock  and Stone. 
The analysis  shows  that rental  products  are far more  accessible  to parish  residents  in terms  of 
their household  income. 
7.19 Local  housing  needs  are established  through  housing  needs  surveys  which  are 
undertaken  in agreement  and partnership  with the relevant  Town or Parish  Council.  It is also 
established  through  the Housing  Register  of persons  assessed  according  to the Council’ s 
Allocations  Policy  as qualifying  residents. 
7.20 Rural  Exception  Sites  are sites where  general  market  housing  would  not normally  be 
acceptable,  which  provide  affordable  housing  in rural areas.  Such  sites may only come  forward 
where  there  is a need  for specific  housing  types  as identified  through  a Housing  Needs  Survey . 
Where  no housing  needs  survey  is available,  the District  Council  will consider  need  demonstrated 
by the housing  register  data. 
Wyre Forest  District 
55 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7.21 Housing  provision  on rural exception  sites must  seek  to address  the needs  of the 
community  by accommodating  households  who are existing  residents  or who have  an existing 
family  or employment  connection  to the area in line with the local connections  criteria.  Proposals 
for development  will need  to demonstrate  that arrangements  are put in place  to ensure  that the 
housing  will remain  permanently  available  to meet  the continuing  needs  of local people. 
7.22 In circumstances  where  it is not viable  to deliver  100%  affordable  housing  on rural 
exceptions  sites,  it may be possible  to cross  subsidise  a scheme  with an element  of market 
housing  (typically  no more  than 20%).  Under  these  circumstances,  developers  will be required 
to provide  additional  supporting  evidence  in the form of an open  book  development  appraisal 
for the proposed  site. The provision  of starter  homes  to meet  identified  local needs  will also be 
an acceptable  form of housing  on rural exception  sites in addition  to other  tenure  types  that 
meet  local housing  needs. 
7.23 There  can be a need  for livestock  management,  agricultural/agricultural  contractors  or 
forestry  workers  to live on site. Rural  workers  dwellings  will only be permitted  where  they are 
considered  to be essential  and the assessment  of this will depend  on the needs  of the particular 
enterprise.  Where  permission  is granted  for an additional  dwelling,  then the applicant  will be 
expected  to agree  to retain  the existing  accommodation  for use within  the unit. Convincing 
evidence  should  be provided  with any application  for the removal  of an occupancy  condition, 
as set out in Policy  SP.11. 
7.24 There  may be specific  circumstances  where  existing  dwellings  are in poor repair  or no 
longer  appropriate  in terms  of their design  to meet  the occupant’ s needs.  In such  circumstances, 
it is considered  that it may be appropriate  to permit  replacement  dwellings  to meet  a specific 
local need. 
Policy  SP.12- Self Build  and Custom  Housing 
Major  development  schemes  of 50 or more  units  should  take into consideration  the demand 
shown  in the Self-Build  and Custom-Build  Register  and where  possible  provide  suitable 
plots.  Self Build  and Custom  Housing  dwellings  within  the site will be developed  in 
accordance  with an agreed  design  code.  Where  plots  have  been  made  available  and 
marketed  appropriately  for at least  12 months  (from  the date when  the relevant  planning 
permission  was granted)  and have  not sold, the plot(s)  may be built out by the developer . The 
timescales  for marketing  will be reduced  if the phasing  of the site and build  out rates  are 
less than 12 months. 
The District  Council  will support  planning  applications  for self-build  and custom-build  housing, 
provided  they are in keeping  with the other  policies  contained  in this Plan. 
Overall  provision  will be reviewed  on an annual  basis  as part of the residential  land 
availability  assessment  and will be based  on the demand  as set out in the Custom  and Self 
Build  Register  maintained  by the Council. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 56 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 The District  Council  will work  closely  with partners,  such  as, developers,  Registered 
Providers,  the Parish  Councils,  Community  Led Housing  Groups  and Neighbourhood 
Planning  Forums  to identify  appropriate  sites for Self Build  and Custom  Housing  schemes. 
Such  schemes  will be subject  to the following  criteria: 
a. The numbers  of each  different  type of Self-Build  or Custom-Build  plots  offered  in the 
scheme  should  reflect  the proportion  of preference  for each  type as shown  in the 
register . 
b. Self-Build  and Custom-Build  plots  within  the scheme  will be developed  in accordance 
with an agreed  design  code.  The design  code  will ensure  the number , scale,  and design 
of Self Build  and Custom  Build  plots  should  be appropriate  to the size and design  of 
the settlement  and the surrounding  landscape. 
c. The site should  be accessible  to local services  and facilities  and within  or adjacent  to 
existing  settlements. 
d. Where  plots  have  been  made  available,  applicants  on the Self-Build  and Custom  Build 
register  should  be notified  by developers.   
e. Where  plots  have  been  made  available,  they should  be reasonably  priced  to reflect 
prevailing  market  values  and average  local income. 
Reasoned  Justification 
7.25 Under  the Self Build  and Custom  House  Building  Regulations  2016,  the District  Council 
is required  to have  regard  to a register  of people  who are interested  in self build  or custom  build 
projects  in the area.  This will help to inform  policy  development  and future  plot requirements  in 
the District.  There  are different  types  of custom  build  which  will have  specific  requirements  for 
the types  of land plots  to be allocated  through  the Local  Plan. 
DIY Custom  Build 
Self Finish  Custom  Build 
Full Turn Key Custom  Build 
Independent   Community  Custom  Build 
Supported  Community  Custom  Build 
Co-housing  Custom  Build 
Affordable  Custom  Build 
7.26 The Self-Build  and Custom-Build  Register  will be updated  on an annual  basis. 
Policy  SP.13 - Housing  for Older  People  and others  with special  housing  requirements 
The Council  will continue  to work  with providers,  developers  and community-led  housing 
initiatives  to meet  the additional  need  over the lifetime  of the Plan for dwellings  suitable  for 
older  people,  whether  as part of suitably  adapted  Class  C3 dwellings  or in Class  C2 
residential  accommodation. 
Wyre Forest  District 
57 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live The District  Council  will also require  all major  housing  development  proposals  to provide 
evidence  that they have  fully considered  the provision  of the following  tenure  and type within 
the overall  housing  mix on site: 
Bungalows 
Sheltered  Housing 
Extra  Care  Units 
Other  types  of supported  housing 
These  housing  types  should  include  housing  for sale and rent and include  intermediate 
forms  of tenure,  having  regard  to the Housing  Need  Study , Housing  Needs  Surveys  (where 
available)  and the Housing  Register . 
The Council  will seek  the provision  of a minimum  of 487 Residential  Institutional  (C2) 
bedspaces  over the Plan Period  to be met on sites allocated  for housing  and this will be to 
meet  a range  of housing  needs  including  for older  people. 
a. Accommodation  for Family  Members  and carers 
The development  of annex  accommodation  will be supported  subject  to its consistency  with 
all other  Local  Plan policies  and where  it meets  the following  criteria: 
i. Accommodation  should  be provided  by way of an extension  which  is physically  linked 
to the existing  dwelling. 
ii. The dwelling  and annex  should  share  vehicular  and pedestrian  access  and the extension 
should  only incorporate  a maximum  of two bedrooms. 
b. Accommodation  for families  with children 
The needs  of families  should  be met through  general  developments. 
There  are a number  of homeless  households  with dependant  children  whose  needs  are 
unlikely  to be met through  market  housing  and there  will be a requirement  to provide  a 
majority  of family  style housing  within  the affordable  housing  mix. 
c. Accommodation  for people  with disabilities 
The District  Council  will require  all major  housing  development  proposals  to contribute 
towards  providing  20% of the total housing  requirement  to meet  the higher  access  standards 
of Part M Building  Regulations  (Access  to and use of buildings),  (Category  2 M4(2), 
accessible  and adaptable  dwelling)  of the Building  Regulations  (2010);  and a further  1% 
of the overall  number  of housing  units  to meet  Category  3 M4(3)  of the Building  Regulations 
(2010),  wheelchair  user dwellings  standards  in properties  where  the Council  has nomination 
rights. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 58 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 Reasoned  Justification 
7.27 National  Planning  Practice  Guidance  (NPPG)  specifies  that Local  Plans  should  consider 
the size, location  and quality  of dwellings  needed  within  the area to allow  older  people  to live 
independently  and safely  in their own home  for as long as possible.  Future  needs  should  be 
broken  down  by tenure  and type: 
Sheltered 
Extra  Care 
Registered  Care  Homes 
Residential  Institutions  (C2 Uses) 
7.28 The Housing  Need  Study  recognises  the number  of people  aged  65 or over is increasing 
from 24,000  in 2016  to 31,800  by 2036.  Wyre Forest  District’ s population  has an old age 
dependency  ratio of 38.6%;  this is well above  Worcestershire  – 34.1%,  West Midlands  – 28.3% 
and England  – 27.2%.  A major  strategic  challenge  for the Local  Plan is to ensure  a range  of 
affordable  housing  provision,  adaptation  and support  for the ageing  population. 
7.29 During  2010/1 1 – 2012/13  Core  Lettings  data showed  that 699 older  people  with support 
needs  were  accommodated  in the social  rented  sector  within  the District.  This housing  need 
will need  to be met within  the overall  housing  requirements  and in addition  the Wyre Forest 
Housing  Need  Study  September  2018  has identified  that there  is a requirement  of 487 C2 units 
for the plan period. 
7.30 Given  the ageing  population  and the identified  levels  of disabilities  amongst  the population 
it will be essential  for some  element  of the new housing  to be built to accessibility  standards  to 
meet  these  needs.  It is estimated  that 23% of all residents  in Wyre Forest  have  a illness/disability 
and this is expected  to increase  to 26% by 2036.  It is estimated  that there  are 450 households 
requiring  wheelchair  accessible  housing  in the district. 
7.31 Financial  viability  testing  has been  undertaken  to meet  the adapted  dwelling  standards 
and therefore  the policy  thresholds  have  been  set at 20% of all new housing  (on sites of 10 
dwellings  or more)  meeting  M4(2)  dwelling  standard  of the Building  Regulations  (2010)  and 1% 
meeting  M4(3)  of the Building  Regulations  (2010),  on dwellings  where  the Council  has nomination 
rights. 
7.32 The provision  of annexes  or flats as part of an extension  to an existing  dwelling  can be 
a useful  way of meeting  the accommodation  needs  of elderly , sick or disabled  relatives  or 
children  returning  to the parental  home.  However , it is important  to ensure  that annexes  do not 
become  physically  separate  dwellings  where  new dwellings  would  not normally  be permitted. 
7.33 In 2020/21  there  were  over 8,500  households  approaching  the Council  for housing  advice 
and 415 homeless  or at risk of homelessness  households  had initial  assessments  undertaken. 
7.34 There  is limited  identifiable  need  for bespoke  student  housing  or for service  families  in 
Wyre Forest.  Those  in serious  housing  needs  could  be met through  the Housing  Register . 
Wyre Forest  District 
59 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live Policy  SP.14 - Gypsy  and Traveller  Site Provision 
The following  sites (A-M),  as shown  on the Policies  Map,  will continue  to be safeguarded 
for Gypsy  and Traveller  use, and in addition,  a new site, (Site N) (Policy  SA.K17)  is allocated 
on land to the rear of Zortech  Avenue,  Kidderminster , to contribute  to meeting  the housing 
needs  of the Gypsy  and Traveller  community  that are expected  to arise  over the Plan period: 
Site A – Lower  Heath,  Stourport-on-Severn  ( 22 pitches) 
Site B – Broach  Road,  Stourport-on-Severn  (9 pitches) 
Site C – Power  Station  Road,  Stourport-on-Severn  (4 pitches) 
Site D –1 Broach  Meadow , Stourport-on-Severn  ( 3 pitches) 
Site E – 1b Broach  Road,  Stourport-on-Severn  (3 pitches) 
Site F – 6/6a  Broach  Road,  Stourport-on-Severn  (5 pitches) 
Site G – Meadow  Park,  Stourport-on-Severn  (7 pitches) 
Site H – Saiwen,  Stourport-on-Severn  (5 pitches) 
Site I – 28/29  Sandy  Lane,  Stourport-on-Severn  (6 pitches) 
Site J – Land  adjacent  Nunn’ s Corner , Stourport-on-Severn  (8 pitches) 
Site K – The Gables  Yard, Stourport-on-Severn  (5 pitches) 
Site L – Gatehouse  Caravan  Park (16 pitches) 
Site M – Wilden  Lane  (4 pitches) 
Site N - Land  to the rear of Zortech  Avenue,  Kidderminster  (16 pitches) 
The 2020  Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  identifies  the need  for 13 
pitches,  under  the Planning  Policy  for Traveller  Sites  (PPTS)  definition  to be provided  in 
the period  2020/21  to 2035/36,  3 of which  need  to be provided  by 2024/5.  It is anticipated 
that the short-term  and longer-term  needs  can be met through  the allocation  of the land to 
the rear of Zortech  Avenue  (Policy  SA.K17)  and limited  intensification/expansion  of the 
existing  safeguarded  sites where  proposals  would  comply  with the other  policies  of the 
Plan.  Gypsy  and Traveller  sites are predominantly  residential  in nature.  Outside  the sites 
safeguarded  and allocated  in this Plan,  planning  permission  for new sites will be granted 
on previously  developed  land or in areas  allocated  primarily  for residential  development 
subject  to all relevant  policies  within  the Local  Plan being  met. Development  in the open 
countryside  that is away  from existing  settlements  or outside  areas  identified  in this Plan 
will be strictly  limited  in accordance  with the Plan’ s policies. 
There  is a wider  cultural  need  for 22 pitches  to address  the housing  needs  of Gypsies  and 
Travellers  who do not meet  the planning  definition  set out in PPTS.  This will be addressed 
through  various  means,  including  residential  caravans/mobile  homes  sites and through 
other  policies  in the Plan which  provide  for different  types  of housing. 
Reasoned  Justification 
7.35 Gypsies  and Travellers  are defined   as per the Planning  Policy  for traveller  sites (2015). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 60 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 7.36 The 2020  Wyre Forest  District  Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  (GTAA) 
provides  a robust  evidence  base  to determine  an appropriate  level of pitch  and plot provision 
for the District.  The GTAA identified  a total indicative  need  for 35 pitches  over the Plan Period, 
of which  13 fall within  the definition  set out in the Planning  Policy  for Traveller  Sites.  This can 
be split down  into 5 year tranches  as follows: 
Table 7.0.4  Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  indicative  need  to 2036 
of which  PTTS  need Cultural  Need 
14 25 5 yr authorised  pitch  shortfall 
(2020/21  to 2024/25)  (A) 
3 3 Potential  turnover  on existing  pitches 
(B) 
0 0 Potential  regularisation  of 
unauthorised  site (C) 
4 4 Potential  expansion  / intensification 
of existing  sites (D) 
4 4 Potential  new site (E)  
3 14 Residual  need  2020/21  to 2024/25 
F=A-B-C-D-E 
5 9 Medium  -term  need  (2025/26  to 
2029/30)  (G) 
3 3 Potential  turnover  on existing  pitches 
(H) 
2 6 Residual  need  2025/26  to 2029/30 
I=G-H 
10 17 Long-term  need  (2030/31  to 2035/36) 
(J) 
2 2 Potential  turnover  on existing  pitches 
(K) 
8 15 Residual  need  2030/31  to 2035/36 
L=J-K 
Summary   
29 51 Total shortfall  2020/21  to 2035/36 
(M) 
8 8 Total potential  turnover  on existing 
pitches  (N)=B+H+K 
0 0 Total potential  regularisation  of 
unauthorised  site(O)=C 
4 4 Potential  expansion  / intensification 
of existing  sites (P)=D 
Wyre Forest  District 
61 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 7 A Desirable  Place  to Live of which  PTTS  need Cultural  Need 
4 4 Potential  new site (Q)=E 
13 35 Residual  need  2020/21  to 2035/36 
(R)=M-N-O-P-Q 
7.37 Under  the PPTS  the Council  should  provide  pitches  for those  meeting  the planning 
definition.  However , there  is no government  guidance  on how to meet  the needs  of those  who 
do not meet  the planning  definition  (other  than by the implication  that they should  be met as 
part of overall  housing  need)  even  though  they may need  to live on a pitch.  Therefore,  as a 
minimum  the Council  are seeking  to address  the needs  of those  meeting  the planning  definition 
and will also endeavour  to meet  the overall  cultural  need  for pitches. 
7.38  The 2020  GTAA identifies  that there  is a need  to provide  4 transit  pitches  in the district. 
According  to the report,  this obligation  could  be met through  temporary  stop over orders, 
negotiated  stop over rights  or provision  of a permanent  site. The use of temporary  stop over 
orders  and/or  negotiated  stop over rights  will be the preference  of the authority  due to the low 
number  of transit  pitches  required  each  year. It is anticipated  that the proposed  sites for temporary 
stop over sites and / or negotiated  stop over rights  will be several  Wyre Forest  District  Council 
car parks  and parks,  used  by Gypsy  and Travellers  in the past.   
Policy  SP.15 - Site Provision  for Travelling  Showpeople 
The former  Burlish  Golf Course  Clubhouse  site (see Policy  SA.K22),  is allocated  and 
safeguarded  to meet  the immediate  needs  of the existing  Travelling  Showpeople  family 
currently  living  within  the District.  The site should  be developed  in accordance  with Policy 
SA.K22. 
Reasoned  Justification 
7.39 The 2020  Wyre Forest  District  Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  identified 
one Travelling  Showperson  family  in the district  who have  a requirement  for a yard to 
accommodate  11 caravans  and equipment.  The allocation  at the former  Burlish  Golf Course 
Clubhouse  site will adequately  meet  the needs  of the family  on a permanent  basis.   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 62 A Desirable  Place  to Live 7 8.1 Improving  the health  and wellbeing  of Wyre Forest  District’ s residents  is a key objective 
of the Council.  It is working   closely  with partner  organisations  to tackle  health  inequalities(10)and 
ensure  the best health  outcomes  for local people. 
Policy  SP.16 - Health  and Wellbeing 
1. Development  should  help minimise  negative  health  impacts  and maximise  opportunities 
to ensure  that people  in Wyre Forest  District  lead healthy , active  lifestyles  and 
experience  a high quality  of life by: 
a. Providing  easy to maintain,  safe and attractive  public  realm  and green  infrastructure 
including  green  spaces,  footpaths,  bridleways  and cycle  routes  that encourage 
active  travel  opportunities.  These  spaces  should  enable  formal  and informal 
physical  activity , recreation  and play, and should  support  healthy  living  and social 
cohesion.  The design  of these  spaces  should  be flexible  (11)and should  consider 
older  people  and those  living  with dementia  or disabilities.   
b. Minimising  and mitigating  the impacts  of negative  air quality  and reducing  people's 
exposure  to poor air quality . 
c. Providing  a mix of high quality , energy  efficient,  affordable  and adaptable  housing 
that meets  the needs  of different  groups  in the community , including  older  people 
and those  with disabilities.   
d. Delivering  new and expanded  health  services  provision  and facilities  in locations 
where  they can be easily  accessed  using  public  transport,  walking  and cycling.   
e. Encouraging  opportunities  for access  to fresh  food,  for example  through  the 
retention  and provision  of allotments,  community  orchards,  fruit trees,  local markets, 
and usable  private  amenity  spaces.   
2. Health  Impact  Assessment  (HIA)  Screening  will be required  for proposals  for, or changes 
of use to: 
Restaurants  and cafés; 
Drinking  establishments; 
Hot food takeaways  (see Policy  DM.18); 
Residential  Institutions; 
Non-residential  institutions;   
Leisure  facilities;   
Betting  shops  and pay-day  loan shops  (Sui Generis). 
The screening  process  will identify  whether  the proposal  requires  a HIA.  
10 Health  inequalities  are differences  in health  status  or in the distribution  of health  resources  between  different  population 
groups,  arising  from the social  conditions  in which  people  are born,  grow , live, work  and age. 
11 Successful  places  can adapt  to changing  circumstances  and demands.  They  are flexible  and are able to respond  to 
a range  of future  needs  (PPG,  Paragraph:  019 Reference  ID: 26-019-20140306,  Revision  date:  06 03 2014) 
Wyre Forest  District 
63 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 8 Health  and Wellbeing HIA will be required  for proposals  for:  
a. Residential  and mixed  use major  development  sites. 
b. Employment  sites of 5 ha or more 
c. Retail  developments  of 500 square  metres  or more.   
The HIA should  be commensurate  with the size of the development. 
Where  an unacceptable  adverse  impact  on health  and wellbeing  is identified  through  the 
Health  Impact  Assessment  process,  development  will not be supported  unless  material 
planning  considerations  indicate  otherwise.   
Reasoned  Justification 
8.2 Wyre Forest  District  Council  recognises  that spatial  planning  has an important  role to play 
in the creation  of healthy , safe and inclusive  communities.   
8.3 The Joint  Strategic  Needs  Assessment  and Public  Health  England  data have  been  used 
to inform  this policy . Health  challenges  for the district  include  obesity  in children  and in 
adults,  mental  health,  limiting  long term illness  or disability  and increased  numbers  of people 
living  with dementia.  Wyre Forest  District  currently  has a large  population  of residents  over the 
age of 65 which  will increase  significantly  over the next 20 years.  Wyre Forest  District  experiences 
significant  health  inequalities.  There  is a link between  the health  and wellbeing  of people  living 
in more  affluent  areas  compared  with those  living  in less affluent  areas.  Current  data shows 
that life expectancy  is 8.4 years  lower  for men and 11.7 years  lower  for women  in the most 
deprived  areas  of Wyre Forest  than in the least  deprived  areas.  (12) 
Table 8.0.1  Key Findings  from  Health  Profile  2019  for Wyre Forest  District 
England  Best England 
Worst England Worcestershire Wyre Forest Year Indicator 
83.3 years 74.2 years 79.6 years 79.9.years 79.4 years 2015-17 Life expectancy 
at birth (males) 
 86.5 years 79.5 years 83.1 years 83.9 years 83.1 years 2015-17 Life expectancy 
at birth 
(females)   
88.4% 51.3% 67.4^ 55.8% 56.8% 2020 Dementia 
diagnosis  (aged 
65+)* 
43.4% 77.6% 62% 62.7% 62.7% 2017/18 Excess  weight 
in adults  (aged 
18+) 
12 Public  Health  England,  Wyre Forest  Health  Profile  2019 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 64 Health  and Wellbeing 8 England  Best England 
Worst England Worcestershire Wyre Forest Year Indicator 
20.5% 44.5% 34.3% 32.8% 35.2% 2017/18 Obese  children 
in year 6 (aged 
10-11) 
77.2% 44.8% 57.8% 61% 58.8% 2015/16 GCSEs 
achieved 
(5A*-C)  incl. 
maths  & English 
*Dementia  diagnosis  is the proportion  of those  who are estimated  to have  dementia  who have  been  diagnosed. 
NB Worst  and best for England  refer to district  and not county 
8.4 
Planning  has a very important  role to play in addressing  these  issues.  The NPPF  contains 
measures  aimed  at reducing  health  inequalities,  improving  access  to healthy  food and reducing 
obesity , encouraging  physical  activity , improving  mental  health  and wellbeing,  securing  proposals 
that meet  the needs  of all sections  of the community  and improving  air quality  to reduce  the 
incidence  of respiratory  diseases.   
8.5 The design  of the built environment  can have  a significant  impact  on both physical  and 
mental  wellbeing.  Well-designed  built environment  can help to reduce  health  inequalities  in 
Wyre Forest;  while  poor environmental  quality , housing  conditions  or pollution  can exacerbate 
them.   
8.6 Obesity  is a major  risk factor  for several  diseases  such  as Type 2 diabetes,  cancer  and 
heart  disease.  It can also affect people's  mental  health.  The design  of the built environment 
should  encourage  physical  activity  and healthier  lifestyles  which  can help reduce  obesity  in both 
adults  and children.   
8.7 New homes  should  be adaptable  to the changing  needs  of their occupants  and be designed 
with all community  groups  in mind,  including,  disabled  and older  people.  The District  Council 
will require  all major  housing  development  proposals  to contribute  towards  providing  20% of 
the total housing  requirement  to meet  the higher  access  standards  of Part M Building  Regulations 
(Access  to and use of buildings),  (Category  2 M4(2),  accessible  and adaptable  dwelling)  of the 
Building  Regulations  (2010),;  and a further  1% of the overall  number  of housing  units  to meet 
Category  3 M4(3)  of the Building  Regulations  (2010),  wheelchair  user dwellings  standards  in 
properties  where  the Council  has nomination  rights.   
8.8 Proposals  will provide  for multifunctional  green  infrastructure.  This will encourage  active 
travel  and social  interaction  and minimise  the potential  for crime  and antisocial  behaviour . 
Proposals  will provide  connectivity  to local centres,  health  and community  facilities,  thereby 
reducing  car dependency . This can be achieved  in part through  public  realm  design  which 
prioritises  people  over motor  traffic. This should  allow  for convenient,  safe and attractive  routes, 
in particular  for walking  and cycling.  Sport  England’ s Active  Design  principles  (13) will be supported 
to encourage  physical  activity  through  the development  layout. 
13 Sport  England  (2015)  Active  Design  Planning  for health  and wellbeing  through  sport  and physical  activity 
Wyre Forest  District 
65 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 8 Health  and Wellbeing 8.9 The provision  of green  spaces  can provide  multiple  benefits  such  as the facilitation  of 
physical  activity , social  cohesion,  healthy  food growing  and improvement  to air quality . They 
should  be accessible  and well-maintained  in order  to preserve  their functionality  and serve 
members  of the communities.  Proposals  that include  access  to fresh  food,  for example  through 
the retention,  enhancement  or provision  of allotments,  community  orchards,  fruit trees  or local 
markets,  and usable  private  amenity  spaces,  will be encouraged.  Shared  use of community 
spaces  will also be encouraged  to improve  social  cohesion  through  schemes  such as community 
allotments  or orchards.   
8.10 Proposals  will seek  to reduce  their negative  impacts  on air quality  and reduce  people’ s 
exposure  to poor quality  air through  sustainable  building  design,  encouragement  of active  travel, 
discouragement  of car dependency  and provision  of electric  charging  points.  Appropriate  planting 
will be provided  to absorb  pollutants  and the design  and layout  of development  will increase 
separation  distances  between  people  and sources  of air pollution. 
8.11 The design  of public  realm  should  be of flexible  design  which  means  that it can adapt 
to changing  uses  and demands.  Developments  should  consider  design  elements  that can affect 
the quality  of life of elderly  and people  living  with dementia.  This includes  the provision  of safe, 
well-lit  and walkable  routes  connecting  local green  spaces  and essential  amenities.  Seating 
areas  provided  in strategic  places,  simple  street  furniture  and plain,  non-reflective  and contrasting 
surfaces  could  improve  the likelihood  of those  with dementia  continuing  their everyday  lives as 
part of the community .  
8.12  New residential  developments  should  be supported  by sufficient  and accessible 
healthcare  provision.  Where  there  is a shortfall  in sufficient  healthcare  facilities,  measures 
should  be taken  to rectify  the shortfall  as a result  of development. 
8.13 Health  Impact  Assessment  (HIA)  is a tool to ensure  that impacts  on health  and wellbeing 
of the population  are considered  at the planning  and design  stage.  HIA Screening  is a simplified 
process  to determine  whether  an HIA is needed  for a particular  scheme. 
8.14 Part B of the policy  requires  certain  developments  to demonstrate  how they have 
specifically  addressed  the health  and wellbeing  principles  specified  in part A through  a HIA. 
Other  development  types,  as also specified  in Part B will be expected  to undertake  a HIA 
screening  assessment  to identify  whether  a proposal  requires  a full HIA. Undertaking  a HIA will 
ensure  that the effects  of a development  on both health  and health  inequalities  are considered 
and addressed  during  the planning  process.  Early  dialogue  with the local planning  authority 
(such  as through  pre-application  advice)  is encouraged  to help establish  the extent  and content 
of HIA. HIAs  will be assessed  by Wyre Forest  District  Council  in consultation  with Worcestershire 
County  Council's  Public  Health  Directorate  and will be a material  consideration  in the planning 
application  process. 
8.15 Further  guidance  on health  and wellbeing  principles  and the HIA and HIA Screening 
process  will be included  in the Health  and Wellbeing  Supplementary  Planning  Document.  This 
SPD will include  HIA and HIA Screening  templates  to guide  the applicants  through  this process.   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 66 Health  and Wellbeing 8 8.16 Other  policies  in the Development  Plan (such  as the Community  Facilities  Policies  DM.6, 
DM.7  & DM.8  address  issues  which  could  have  implications  for health  and well-being  and should 
be considered  in conjunction  with this policy . Also see the adopted  Wyre Forest  Playing  Pitch 
Strategy  and Action  Plan and the Indoor  and Built Facilities  Strategy . 
8.17 The Food  and Drink  Retailing  Policy  (Policy  DM.18)  further  expands  on the issues  around 
the prevalence  of hot-food  takeaways  and how they can negatively  impact  on health.   
8.18 The Sustainability  Appraisal  has assessed  the Local  Plan as having  an overall  positive 
impact  on health  and wellbeing.  The Local  Plan is seen  as supporting  healthy  lifestyles  by 
aiming  to maximise  the delivery  of Green  Infrastructure  and provide  housing  and employment 
sites in locations  that are close  to existing  services,  thereby  encouraging  waling  and cycling 
and reducing  reliance  on car travel  with the associated  air pollution  problems. 
  
Wyre Forest  District 
67 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 8 Health  and Wellbeing 9.1 The Local  Plan provides  the strategic  framework  for the future  prosperity  and evolution 
of the District’ s economy . The District’ s economy  is vital to the prosperity  and quality  of life of 
its residents.  Economic  growth  can increase  employment  opportunities,  improve  income  and 
regenerate  communities.  This chapter  includes  policies  relating  to employment,  retail,  offices 
and tourism. 
9.2 Appropriate  infrastructure  to serve  businesses  and new development  is essential  for future 
prosperity . Suitable  access  to and from economic  areas  is crucial  to the effectiveness  of 
businesses. 
 Local  Economy 
Policy  SP.17 - A Diverse  Local  Economy 
1. At least  29 hectares  of employment  land will be brought  forward  in the plan period  up 
to 2036. 
2. The sites allocated  for employment  use over the plan period  are shown  on the Policies 
Map and are listed  in table  9.0.1.  These  sites are to be safeguarded  for economic 
development.  The development  of these  sites will need  to be in line with the site specific 
policies  identified  in Part C of this Plan. 
3. In addition  to the sites allocated  for employment  use, all future  employment  land should 
be located  in highly  accessible  locations  and be in accordance  with the settlement 
hierarchy  in Policy  SP.2. 
4. The development  of small-scale  businesses  and starter  units  which  are less than 500 
sqm,  will be encouraged  in suitable  locations  and where  they do not conflict  with other 
policy  objectives.  Live work  units  will be encouraged  where  they conform  to 
requirements  of Policy  DM.1 1. 
5. Land  and premises  within  the District’ s existing  employment  areas  will be reserved  for  
B2 and B8 use classes  as well as employment  generating  uses  including  Class  E 
offices (other  than professional  and financial  services  offices),  research  and 
development  and light industrial  uses  and, where  appropriate,  sui generis  uses. 
6. Small  scale  (less  than 500 sqm gross)  development  of retail  uses  in rural areas  will be 
supported  where  appropriate. 
7. Small  scale  (less  than 500 sqm gross)  development  of commercial  and leisure  uses 
in rural areas  will be supported  where  appropriate. 
8. Proposals  for expansion,  updating  and intensification  of employment  uses  on existing 
sites will be supported  where  they do not compromise  the activities  of the employment 
area or conflict  with other  policy  objectives. 
9. Rural  employment  sites will be safeguarded  for employment  uses  where  appropriate. 
Proposals  for small  scale  employment  of less than 500 sqm in rural areas  will be 
assessed  on their merits  and should  have  regard  to accessibility  by public  transport 
and national  policy  as well as other  Development  Plan Policies  (such  as Policy  DM.10). 
The use of previously  developed  land will be supported  where  suitable  sustainable, 
accessible  opportunities  exist. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 68 A Good  Place  to do Business 9 Reasoned  Justification 
9.3 The strength  of the District’ s economy  is vital to the future  prosperity  and quality  of life of 
its residents.  Economic  prosperity  is a primary  objective  of Wyre Forest  District  Council  and 
this has been  highlighted  by initiatives  such  as the ‘ReW yre Prospectus’  and the more  recently 
adopted  ReW yre ReNewed  Prospectus  as well as initiatives  such  as the Local  Development 
Order  for South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park. 
9.4 The Government  in October  2018  has produced  a Local  Industrial  Strategies  policy 
prospectus  and a document  'Working  towards  a West Midlands  Local  Industrial  Strategy  (May 
2019).  This is a strategic  approach  to jointly  designing  solutions.  The strategic  overview  will 
help inform  LEPs  to drive  future  growth  and productivity , including  skills  growth,  infrastructure 
improvements  and innovation  within  the West Midlands  region.    
9.5 A strategic  approach  to Employment  Development  is set out within  Policy  SP.17 and the 
quantum  of land required  to meet  the Districts  future  employment  needs  has been  determined 
through  the production  of an Employment  Land  Review  (ELR)  2016  and updated  in 2018. 
9.6 The figure  of less than 500 sqm used  for small  scale  businesses  is a figure  that is used 
for development  in The Town and Country  Planning  (General  Permitted  Development)  (England) 
Order  2015  as amended. 
Table 9.0.1  Employment  Allocation  Sites* 
 Size in hectares  Site  Policy  reference  number 
 0.32  Frank  Stone  Building  Policy  SA.K18 
 0.2  Green  Street  depot 
 4.3  SDF  Policy  SA.K19 
 2.37  British  Sugar  Phase  2 
 1.48  British  Sugar  Plot D 
 5  Romwire 
 2.51  Adj Easter  Park  Policy  SA.K20 
 0.25  Hoobrook  Site 
 1.75  VOSA  Worcester  Road  Policy  SA.K21 
1.96  Land  off Zortech  Avenue  Policy  SA.K23 
 0.22  North  of Wilden  Industrial  Estate  Policy  SA.S15 
 0.69  Ratio  Park 
 0.34  Wilden  Industrial  Estate  Policy  SA.S16 
 1  Oakleaf  Finepoint 
Wyre Forest  District 
69 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 9 A Good  Place  to do Business  Size in hectares  Site  Policy  reference  number 
 7.34  Land  off Park Gate  Road,  Lea Castle  Policy  SP.LCV1 
 1  Alton  Nurseries  Policy  SA.R2 
 0.7  Cursley  Distribution  Park  Policy  SA.PDL 
31.43 TOTAL SITES 
* Sites  without  a policy  reference  number  have  already  been  developed.   
9.7 The ELR identified  that Wyre Forest  has higher  levels  of economic  activity  and lower 
claimant  unemployment  levels  than regional  and national  averages.  Unemployment  in Wyre 
Forest  District  is 3.4%,  the regional  figure  is 5.0%  and nationally  4.3%. 
9.8 However , challenges  still remain  and the District  still suffers from a historic  legacy  of 
economic  restructuring,  relating  to the decline  of carpet  manufacturing  in Kidderminster , which 
is still ongoing.  The District  also has relatively  few high-skilled  residents  and higher  levels  of 
those  with no qualifications  than comparator  areas.  Furthermore,  the gap between  Wyre Forest’ s 
resident  and workplace  wages  implies  a disconnect  between  the quality  of employment  available 
to commuters  travelling  out of the District  and that available  in Wyre Forest  District. 
9.9 Given  these  challenges  it is important  that a positive  economic  framework  is put in place 
to help tackle  these  issues.  Having  sufficient,  readily  available  and attractive  land,  of an 
appropriate  type and in the right location,  is therefore  vital to tackling  some  of these  challenges. 
The amount  and type of employment  land identified  in Policy  SP.17 will ensure  that the District 
is in a good  position  to respond  and react  to the continued  diversification  of the local economy . 
9.10 A focus  of the Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan is to provide  development  that supports 
the area’ s economic  prosperity . The principal  mechanisms  to achieve  this include  making 
provision  for: 
The right amount  of quality , readily  available  and type of land for employment  uses  in 
locations  where  business  will thrive  and be resilient  to the challenges  of competition  and 
move  towards  a low-carbon  economy . 
To protect  and encourage  land for employment  use, particularly  for affordable  small/medium 
spaces,  start-up  and incubator  units  and flexible  employment  space,  in order  to support 
the District’ s current  and future  economic  and employment  needs. 
Facilitate  inward  investment  and support  businesses,  particularly  small  and medium  sized 
enterprises  and creative  industries  to grow  the employment  base  of the District. 
Sufficient  housing  provision  that enables  more  of the labour  force  to be housed  locally  and 
provides  the right mix to meet  the wide range  of housing  needs. 
Infrastructure  that supports  communities,  housing,  the labour  force  and facilitates  the 
movement  of labour , goods  and materials  through  the alignment  of development  and 
supporting  infrastructure;  this will include  provision  of facilities  supporting  training  and skills. 
9.11 In addition,  it is important  that the plan is flexible  and responsive  to market  demands. 
The Council  will annually  monitor  employment  land allocations  within  the district  as part of the 
Authority  Monitoring  Report  (AMR). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 70 A Good  Place  to do Business 9 Town Centre  Development 
9.12 Town centres  are crucial  to the social,  economic  and environmental  wellbeing  of the 
District.  The NPPF  paragraph  86 states  that "planning  policies  and decisions  should  support 
the role that town  centres  play at the heart  of local communities  by taking  a positive  approach 
to their growth,  management  and adaptation." 
9.13 The concentration  of a range  of goods,  services  and facilities  in one area creates  a 
centre  for communities  and enables  people  to make  one trip for many  reasons.  The District’ s 
settlement  hierarchy  of towns  is Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley , and this 
provides  the basis  for identifying  the locations  for new retail,  leisure  and commercial 
development.   
Policy  SP.18 - Town Centre  Development 
1. Support  will be given  to safeguarding,  maintaining  and enhancing  the vitality  and 
viability  of the existing  retail  centres  throughout  the District. 
2. New development  for retail,  commercial  and leisure  uses  should  be focussed  on the 
three  town  centres  of Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley . Main  town 
centre  uses  should  be located  in town  centres,  then in edge  of centre  locations;  and 
only if suitable  sites are not available  (or expected  to become  available  within  a 
reasonable  period)  should  out of centre  sites be considered. 
3. Small  scale  (less  than 500 sq m) development  of retail  development  within  towns  will 
be supported  subject  to proposals  being  in keeping  with the settlement  hierarchy  and 
proposals  not causing  adverse  effects  on the built,  historic  and natural  environment. 
4. Small  scale  (less  than 500 sq m) development  of office development  within  towns  will 
be supported  subject  to proposals  being  in keeping  with the settlement  hierarchy  and 
proposals  not causing  adverse  effects  on the built,  historic  and natural  environment. 
5. Proposals  for alternative  town  centre  uses  outside  of the primary  shopping  areas,  such 
as residential,  which  can play an important  role in ensuring  the vitality  of centres  will 
be encouraged  on appropriate  sites if there  is no significant  adverse  impact  on the 
overall  vitality  and viability  of the existing  centre. 
6. Proposals  for town  centre  uses  such  as recreation,  will be supported  if there  is no 
significant  adverse  impact  on the overall  vitality  and viability  of the existing  town  centre. 
7. Proposals  for the reuse  of vacant  floorspace  for town  centre  uses  at ground  floor and 
residential  at upper  floors  and regeneration  of the eastern  part of Kidderminster  town 
centre  to provide  a counterbalance  to Weavers  Wharf  will be supported. 
Reasoned  Justification 
9.14 Wyre Forest  District  Council  applied  for a bid from the Government’ s Future  High Streets 
Fund  and has been  awarded  £20.5m  to transform  important  regeneration  sites within 
Kidderminster  town  centre.   
Wyre Forest  District 
71 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 9 A Good  Place  to do Business 9.15 Three  major  transformational  projects  will improve  permeability  around  the town  and 
improve  connectivity  between  the more  popular  western  side with the less popular  eastern  side 
and will create  new commercial  and housing  provision,  supporting  regeneration  of the town  and 
introducing  a wide range  of uses.   
9.16 The funding  will enable  the derelict  former  Magistrates  Court,  a Grade  II Listed  Building 
to be transformed  into a multifunctional  digital  and creative  enterprise  hub. The Bull Ring area 
will be developed  as a gateway  into the town  and access  between  Worcester  Street  and 
Bromsgrove  Street  car park will be improved  through  a programme  of acquisition  and 
redevelopment  of redundant  and no longer  fit for purpose  properties.  The three  development 
schemes  will improve  linkages  around  the town  centre.  There  will be investment  in public  realm 
and uses  within  the town  centre  will be diversified.  The development  will be transformational 
and significantly  boost  the local economy . 
9.17  Kidderminster  will also be transformed  through  the regeneration  of Lionfields  which 
forms  part of the Council’ s ReW yre initiative  together  with the transformation  of the public  realm 
in High Street,  Vicar Street,  Exchange  Street  and Oxford  Street.  Crown  House  has 
been  demolished  and redevelopment  of the area will transform  the Bullring  area of Kidderminster 
town  centre  and will ensure  a more  attractive  shopping  environment. 
9.18 The retail  sector  and town centres  are undergoing  a period  of significant  structural  change 
arising  not just from the effects  of the recent  and sustained  economic  downturn  but also the 
continuing  popularity  and convenience  provided  by out-of-town  facilities  and the increasing 
adoption  of online  shopping  by both consumers  and retailers. 
9.19  The Covid  pandemic  has also had a detrimental  impact  on the High Street.  The pandemic 
has led to an acceleration  of changes  in the way consumers  shop,  and a decline  in employment 
in town  centres.  At the current  time it is unknown  what  the long-term  effects  of the pandemic 
on town  centres  will be.  
9.20 The three  town  centres  of Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  all have 
historic  buildings  within  them  which  add to the quality  and attractiveness  of the town  centres. 
The Council  wish to ensure  that the three  towns  are attractive  centres  that members  of the 
public  want  to visit.  
9.21 Policy  SP.18, together  with other  policies  in the Plan,  seeks  to foster  and enhance  the 
vitality  and viability  of the town  centres,  including  encouragement  of appropriate  alternative 
uses  of vacant  retail  units,  to ensure  that the town  centres  will remain  vibrant  places  at the heart 
of their communities.   
9.22 The Retail  and Commercial  Leisure  Needs  Study  identified  that there  is no additional 
capacity  for further  convenience  floorspace  in the District  and there  is no pressing  need  for the 
Council  to allocate  any sites for additional  larger  food stores.  In addition,  the Wyre Forest  District 
Retail  and Commercial  Leisure  Needs  study  identified  that: 
9.23 "Whilst  Kidderminster  Town Centre  does  have  a theoretical  need  for additional  comparison 
goods  shopping,  due to commitments  this need  only arises  toward  the end of the plan period. 
We do not therefore  consider  any specific  site allocations  are required  now and would  suggest 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 72 A Good  Place  to do Business 9 instead  that there  is encouragement  given  to the reuse  of vacant  floorspace  and regeneration 
of the eastern  part of the town centre  to provide  a counterbalance  to Weavers  Wharf."  (Paragraph 
6.88,  Retail  and Commercial  Leisure  Needs  Study  2016). 
9.24 "Neither  Stourport-on-Severn  nor Bewdley  Town Centres  are forecast  to have  needs 
for significant  levels  of comparison  shopping  floorspace  for them  to continue  to fulfil their existing 
roles."  (Paragraph  6.89,  Retail  and Commercial  Leisure  Needs  Study  2016). 
9.25 Given  this position,  it is not proposed  to specifically  allocate  any sites for future  retail 
needs.  However , whilst  no sites are required  to be allocated  to meet  need,  support  will continue 
to be provided  within  the identified  retail  areas  of the town’ s where  future  development 
opportunities  might  arise.  Maps  showing  the Primary  Shopping  Areas  can be found  in the 
Appendix  of the Plan.   In addition,  the Council  will continue  to support  the development  and 
diversification  of the three  main  towns  in the District  to ensure  that their role as strategic  Centres 
are retained  and enhanced. 
Sustainable  Tourism 
9.26 Wyre Forest  District  has an attractive  and diverse  landscape  character , which  has 
contributed  to growing  tourism  in the area.  Within  the District  are many  visitor  and tourist 
attractions,  a number  of them  are of regional  significance  such  as Severn  Valley Railway  and 
West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park.  The District  has many  more  “natural”  tourist/visitor 
attractions  such  as The Wyre Forest  itself,  Habberley  Valley, Local  Nature  Reserves,  Local 
Wildlife  Sites,  the River  Severn  and Stourport  Riverside  as well as Brinton  Park.  The District 
also has Bewdley  Museum  which  attracts  200,000  visitors  per annum  and the Museum  of Carpet 
in Kidderminster . 
9.27 The following  policy  seeks  to protect  and enhance  the existing  visitor  and tourist  facilities 
whilst  providing  opportunities  for new tourist  attractions  and ensuring  that the high quality  of 
the environment  is not compromised. 
Policy  SP.19 - Sustainable  Tourism 
1. Support  will be given  to proposals  that improve  the quality  and diversity  of existing 
visitor/tourist  facilities,  attractions,  accommodation  and infrastructure,  where 
development  is compatible  with the physical  character  of the area and does  not cause 
any unacceptable  impacts. 
2. Proposals  for new tourism  related  developments  will be considered  on their merits  and 
determined  in line with the policies  contained  within  this Plan. 
3. Proposals  linked  to the Tourism  Industry  should  incorporate  sustainable  transport  links 
as the site should  be readily  and safely  accessible  by public  transport  wherever  possible, 
especially  between  attractions  and Kidderminster  town  centre.  Sustainable  transport 
links and infrastructure  to promote  ease  of access  to the Wyre Forest, 
Wyre Forest  District 
73 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 9 A Good  Place  to do Business Stourport-on-Severn,  Bewdley , West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park and Kidderminster 
Railway  Station  will be sought  where  it is practical  and viable  to do so. 
4. Support  will be given  to developments,  projects  and initiatives  that assist  in promoting 
the waterways  as a tourist  attraction  and proposals  that facilitate  and encourage  heritage 
tourism. 
Reasoned  Justification 
9.28 Tourism  is an important  element  within  the overall  economy  of the area.  Each  year more 
than 119 million  visits  are made  to the region,  generating  over £121  million  to the local economy 
and offers employment  to more  than 2,100.  During  2014  2.5 million  trips were  undertaken  to 
Wyre Forest  District  comprising  2.3 million  day trips and 0.2 million  overnight  visitors.  £64 million 
was spent  by day visitors  and £23 million  by overnight  visitors.  The local visitor  economy  supports 
2,138  jobs within  the area.  It is recognised  that the Historic  Environment  is a strong  contributor 
to the economic  benefits  of the District  resulting  from Heritage  Tourism. 
9.29 The visitor  economy  creates  new and additional  services  that can lead to the creation 
and growth  of businesses  in the area.  Tourism  also helps  to support  the high level of employment 
that is found  in the region. 
9.30 A strong  visitor  economy  can support  regeneration  projects,  additional  facilities  and 
services  for visitors.  This also provides  local people  with these  same  facilities  that can enrich 
the life of local communities. 
9.31 The majority  of visitors  to Wyre Forest  District  visit on day trips and do not stay overnight. 
Day trips are important  but the short  break  market  needs  to be supported  and encouraged  to 
expand  which  would  help to secure  greater  economic  benefits  for the area as a whole. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 74 A Good  Place  to do Business 9 10.1 Wyre Forest  District  Council  has an overall  vision  to protect,  improve  and enhance  the 
built and natural  environment  in order  to provide  an accessible,  attractive,  enjoyable  and healthy 
place  to be. The quality  of the District’ s historic  environment  is one of its most  valuable  assets 
and includes  a diverse  collection  of heritage  assets,  sensitive  habitats  and attractive  landscapes. 
10.2 The built and natural  environment  includes  everything  that surrounds  us from open  space 
to historic  buildings,  rivers  and canals  and the wider  countryside . The environment  of Wyre 
Forest  District  is made  unique  by the valleys  of the River  Severn  and River  Stour  and by the 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  which  all run through  the District  and help to shape  the 
landscape.  A major  and distinctive  landscape  asset  is the Wyre Forest  itself,  comparable  to the 
rivers  in terms  of both character  and significance  within  planning  policy  and being  the largest 
contiguous  area of Ancient  Woodland  in England  (source:  Wyre  Forest  Landscape  Partnership ). 
The District  has a number  of sites and features  which  are designated  either  nationally  or locally 
for conservation  interest. 
10.3 A high quality  environment  can have  numerous  benefits  for an area.  Businesses  are 
more  likely  to locate  in areas  where  the built and natural  environment  is attractive.  The natural, 
historic,  and built environment  of the District  is also attractive  to tourists  and can create  a strong 
sense  of place,  helping  to retain  residents  within  the District. 
10.4 Access  to high-quality , well-maintained  public  space  is an essential  part of promoting 
active,  healthy  lifestyles.  Well-designed  streets  can encourage  walking  and cycling  and good 
access  to public  space  can facilitate  participation  in sport  and active  recreation.   A comprehensive 
network  of green  spaces  and corridors  will support  a range  of biodiversity  and will help to tackle 
climate  change. 
10.5 This chapter  sets out policies  to define  quality  design  and safeguard  and enhance  the 
natural  and historic  environment  of Wyre Forest  District. 
Wyre Forest  District 
75 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 
Wyre Forest  District  is a considerably  diverse  area with particularly  distinctive  characteristics 
and heritage  assets.  It is especially  important  to aim for quality  design  in any future  development 
to both complement  and enhance  this local distinctiveness  and create  a high quality  environment. 
Policy  SP.20 - Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 
1. High Quality  Design 
All development  within  Wyre Forest  District  will be expected  to exhibit  high quality 
design.  It will need  to integrate  effectively  with its surroundings,  in terms  of form and 
function,  reinforce  local distinctiveness  and conserve,  and where  appropriate,  enhance 
cultural  and heritage  assets  and their settings.  New, inclusive  and innovative  designs 
will be encouraged  and supported  where  they enhance  the overall  quality  of the built 
environment. 
2. Creating  and Reinforcing  Local  Distinctiveness 
Wyre Forest  District  has an existing  character  that is determined  by the qualities  of 
the existing  buildings  and landscape.  New development  should  respond  to these 
existing  qualities  and ensure  that it represents  a positive  addition  to the streetscape 
or landscape.  Where  the existing  context  is weak  or negative,  it is important  that new 
development  demonstrates  an improvement  in the quality  of the area.  Guidance  is 
provided  in the District's  Adopted  Design  Guidance  Supplementary  Planning  Document 
2015.   
Reasoned  Justification 
10.6 High quality  design  is considered  to be essential  for sustainable  development  and it is 
recognised  as a key contributor  to community  health,  economic  value,  social  well-being  and 
inclusion,  as well as environmental  quality . High quality  design  is needed  to create  places  where 
people  want  to live, work  and visit. Design  is important  everywhere  in the District,  not only in 
maintaining  places  which  are attractive,  but also in revitalising  and regenerating  places.  High 
quality  design  is not just about  individual  buildings  but how places  work  as well as look. 
10.7 The NPPF  (2021)  Chapter  12 'Achieving  well-designed  places'  emphasises  that creation 
of high quality  buildings  and places  is fundamental  to what  the planning  process  should  achieve. 
The District  Council's  adopted  Design  Guidance  Supplementary  Planning  Document  of 2015 
(14) underlies  its commitment  to improving  the quality  of new developments  within  the area and 
this will be updated  following  adoption  of the Local  Plan. 
14 Design  Guidance  SPD WFDC,  2015 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 76 A Unique  Place 10 10.8 It is widely  recognised  that the process  of good  design  starts  with the creation  of a well 
planned  structure  of streets  and spaces  which  are often  the most  enduring  feature  of successful 
places.(15)Effectively  connecting  new streets   and spaces  into their surroundings  will help to 
assimilate  new developments. 
10.9 The District  contains  a rich heritage  with a range  of heritage  assets  including  significant 
buildings,  structures,  and archaeology  and conservation  areas.  These  include  the Staffordshire 
and Worcestershire  canal  in addition  to a valued  network  of green  infrastructure  incorporating 
important  habitats,  rivers  and streams.  This creates  an asset-rich  environment  which  will influence 
the location,  design  and use of future  development  and management  of the public  realm. 
10.10  Utilising  existing  qualities  including  heritage  assets  will help to strengthen  the sense 
of local identity  and community . If successfully  incorporated,  these  elements  will also improve 
the overall  legibility  of the place  with inclusion  of recognisable  landmarks,  spaces  and points 
of enclosure.  These  strategic  policies  will help to ensure  the creation  of successful  places  that 
are secure,  active,  well-connected  and attractive  places  to live and work,  with a clear  sense  of 
community . 
10.11 Crime  and the fear of crime  can affect the well-being  of the District's  communities. 
 Even  low levels  of anti-social  behaviour  and fear of crime  can have  a significant  impact  on 
people’ s lives.   In line with the objectives  of the NPPF  paragraph  92 new development  within 
Wyre Forest  District  should  create  safer  and accessible  environments  where  crime,  disorder 
and the fear of crime  do not undermine  quality  of life or community  cohesion. 
10.12  Policy  SP.20 should  be read in conjunction  with Policy  DM.24  (Quality  Design  and 
Local  Distinctiveness). 
15 Manual  for Streets  Paragraph  1.1.2  (Dft & DCLG  2005) 
Wyre Forest  District 
77 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place Historic  Environment 
10.13  The District  currently  has about  750 designated  heritage  assets  included  on the National 
Heritage  List for England,  together  with 17 Conservation  Areas.  Undesignated  heritage  assets 
include  those  identified  on the Worcestershire  Historic  Environment  Record  together  with a 
approximately  1000  included  by the District  Council  on the local heritage  list. 
10.14  Historically  the River  Severn  was the principal  transportation  network,  being  navigable 
as far north  as Bewdley , and encouraging  its development  as a market  town  and point  of transfer 
of merchandise  from the Middle  Ages  onwards.  The development  of the Staffordshire  and 
Worcestershire  Canal  in the late 18th century  resulted  in dramatic  industrial  expansion  at 
Kidderminster , and the creation  of the new inland  port of Stourport-on-Severn,  whilst  the fortunes 
of Bewdley  correspondingly  declined.  The coming  of the railways  in the mid-19th century 
supported  further  industrial  expansion  to the east of the River  Severn  and improved  links both 
east-west  and north-south. 
10.15  The District’ s villages  and hamlets  are mostly  of medieval  or earlier  origin.  Many  of 
them  have  surviving  medieval  assets,  such  as the parish  church,  ponds  and earthworks.  To 
the east of the River  Severn  nucleated  villages  are set within  a landscape  that is characterised 
by diverse  and important  historic  field systems,  punctuated  by small  areas  of ancient  and 
semi-natural  woodlands  and remnants  of historic  parklands.  To the west of the River  Severn, 
the farmsteads  and settlements  are more  dispersed  and to the north  west of the District  the 
Wyre Forest  itself remains  a dominant  feature. 
Policy  SP.21 - Historic  Environment 
Development  proposals  should  protect,  conserve  and enhance  all heritage  assets  and their 
settings,  including  assets  of potential  archaeological  interest,  subject  to the provisions 
of Policy  DM.23  (Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment).  Their  contribution  to the character 
of the landscape  or townscape  should  be safeguarded  and protected  in order  to sustain 
the historic  quality , sense  of place,  environmental  quality  and economic  vibrancy  of Wyre 
Forest  District.  In particular  this applies  to: 
a. Designated  heritage  assets;  i.e. listed  buildings,  conservation  areas,  scheduled 
monuments,  registered  parks  and gardens  and registered  battlefields;  also 
non-designated  heritage  assets  (including  those  identified  on the District’ s Local 
Heritage  List or for which  a Historic  Environment  Record  exists),  and their settings. 
b. The historic  landscape,  including  locally  distinctive  settlement  patterns,  field systems, 
woodlands  and commons  and historic  farmsteads,  smallholdings  and their settings. 
c. Designed  landscapes,  including  parkland,  gardens,  cemeteries,  churchyards,  public 
parks,  urban  open  spaces  and industrial,  military  or institutional  landscapes,  and their 
settings. 
d. Archaeological  remains  of all periods. 
e. Historic  transportation  networks  and infrastructure  including  roads  and track-ways, 
canals,  river navigations,  railways  and their associated  industries,  and their settings. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 78 A Unique  Place 10 f. The market  town  of Bewdley  with its historic  street  and plot patterns,  buildings  and 
open  spaces  along  with their settings  and views  of the town. 
g. The historic  inland  port of Stourport-on-Severn  with its late-18th century  street  pattern 
and buildings  along  with their settings  and views  of the town. 
h. The industrial  urban  landscape  of the historic  market  town  of Kidderminster  with its 
surviving  heritage  assets  and their settings. 
i. The rural villages  within  the District,  including  their associated  Conservation  Areas  and 
buildings,  along  with their settings  and historic  views  to and from the surrounding 
countryside. 
Reasoned  Justification 
10.16  When  considering  development  proposals  Policy  SP.21 should  be read in conjunction 
with Policy  DM.23  Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment. 
10.17  The historic  environment  of Wyre Forest  is a valuable,  finite  and irreplaceable  resource, 
which  is central  to the character  and identity  of the area.  It has a crucial  role in supporting 
sustainable  development  through  enhancing  the quality  of life of those  currently  living  in and 
visiting  the area and should  do so for generations  to come  as well as delivering  wider  economic 
benefits  through  tourism  and uplift  in related  development  benefits. 
10.18  Proposals  for development  should  have  regard  to the locally  distinctive  character  of 
Wyre Forest  District  and appropriate  weight  will be given  to those  characteristics  identified  when 
determining  proposals. 
10.19  Development  proposals  should  protect,  conserve  and enhance  the significance  of 
heritage  assets,  and the valuable  contribution   they make   to the  quality , sense   of place, 
environment, economy and vibrancy  of the Wyre Forest District . 
10.20  Heritage  assets  are a powerful  reminder  of the work  and life of earlier  generations. 
Opportunities  will also be pursued  to aid the promotion, understanding and appreciation of the 
historic environment as a means  of maximising  wider  public benefits, and reinforcing   a strong 
sense  of place. 
10.21  The benefits  of conserving  and enhancing  heritage  assets  include: 
a. Potential  for sustainable  development,  reducing  carbon  emissions  by re-using  historic 
structures 
b. Influencing  the character  of an area and giving  it a sense  of place 
c. Providing  opportunities  to be the catalyst  for regeneration  within  an area and inspiring  new 
development  and imaginative  design 
10.22  Historic  Landscape  Characterisation  studies  have  been  produced  for Worcestershire 
County  Council.  These  provide  an evidence  base  that can be used  to inform  assessments  of 
local distinctiveness  and the heritage  value  of historic  landscapes  and their associated  heritage 
assets.  The contribution  that historic  farmsteads  make  to the landscape  is recognised  in the 
guidance  produced  as a result  of the West Midlands  Farmsteads  and Landscapes  Project. 
Wyre Forest  District 
79 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place 10.23  Designed  landscapes  include  historic  parks  at Upper  Arley , Ribbesford  and Wribbenhall 
as well as Brinton  Park and Kidderminster  cemetery . The Policies  Map will specifically  identify 
Conservation  Areas,  Registered  Parks  and Gardens  and Scheduled  Monuments.  Others  are 
identified  in the local heritage  lists available  to view on the District  Council’ s website  and 
Worcestershire  County  Council’ s Historic  Environment  Records.  As well as landscape  interest, 
these  heritage  assets  have  significant  architectural  and archaeological  interest  and often  contain 
other  monuments  and memorials. 
10.24  Archaeological  remains  provide  crucial  links to the past and can provide  useful 
information  about  local heritage.  In addition  to those  Scheduled  Monuments  included  on the 
National  Heritage  List for England  the District  has many  undesignated  sites with archaeological 
potential  – these  are often  identified  on the Worcestershire  Historic  Environment  Record. 
10.25  A green  infrastructure-led  approach  to development  could  aid the conservation  of 
historic  environment  features,  for example  by allowing  archaeology  to remain  in situ or 
strategically  placing  green  space  to preserve  the setting  of designated  heritage  assets.  Therefore 
this policy  has close  links with Policy  SP.28 (Green  Infrastructure). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 80 A Unique  Place 10 Landscape  Character 
Policy  SP.22 - Landscape  Character 
1. Landscape  Character 
New development  must  protect  and where  possible  enhance  the unique  character  of the 
landscape  including  individual  settlements  or hamlets  located  within  it. Opportunities  for 
landscape  gain will be sought  alongside  all new development,  in order  that landscape 
character  is strengthened  and enhanced. 
The Worcestershire  County  Council  Landscape  Character  Assessment  Supplementary 
Guidance  (2012  or as later amended)  and Historic  Landscape  Characterisation  will be used 
as guidance  when  determining  applications  for development  within  the rural areas. 
Planning  policies  and decisions  should  contribute  to and enhance  the natural  and local 
environment  by protecting  and enhancing  valued  landscapes,  sites of biodiversity  or 
geological  value  and soils. 
2. Severn  Valley  Regional  Heritage  Park 
The establishment  of a Severn  Valley Regional  Heritage  Park to link the historic  towns  and 
landscape  from Stourport-on-Severn  through  to Ironbridge  will be supported  and promoted 
during  the plan period. 
Reasoned  Justification 
10.26   One of the core principles  in the NPPF  is that planning  should  recognise  the intrinsic 
character  and beauty  of the countryside.  Local  plans  should  include  strategic  policies  for the 
conservation  and enhancement  of the natural  environment,  including  landscape.   This includes 
designated  landscapes  but also the wider  countryside. 
10.27  Natural  England  defines  landscape  character  as “a distinct,  recognisable  and consistent 
pattern  of elements  be it natural  (soil,  landform)  and/or  human  (for example  settlement  and 
development)  in the landscape  that makes  one landscape  different  from another , rather  than 
better  or worse”.  (16) 
Worcestershire  County  Council  has undertaken  a Landscape  Character  Assessment  (LCA) 
covering  the rural areas  of the county . The LCA is a tool for identifying  those  features  that give 
a locality  its sense  of place,  and is used  to sub-divide  the landscape  into areas  of similar 
character , classified  as Landscape  Types.  The LCA Supplementary  Guidance  is a document 
designed  to inform  planning  and land management,  and is a tool for planners,  designers  and 
local communities.(17) 
16 https://www .gov.uk/government/publications/landscape-character-assessments-identify-and-describe-landscape-types 
17 http://www .worcestershire.gov .uk/cms/landscape-character-assessment.aspx 
Wyre Forest  District 
81 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place 10.28  The LCA and Historic  Landscape  Characterisation  will be used  when  determining 
applications  for development  in rural areas.  LCA determines  the sensitivity  of the landscape 
which  may be used  at a strategic  level to help guide  new development  to the most  appropriate 
areas.  Areas  of high landscape  sensitivity  are those  which  are least  able to accommodate 
changes  without  damage  to their character  and these  include  the Wyre Forest  itself.  Less 
sensitive  areas  are those  which  are the most  likely  to be suitable  for future  small  scale 
development  such  as community  facilities  and rural affordable  housing,  needed  to maintain  the 
viability  of the District’ s villages 
10.29  The landscape  of the Severn  Valley is particularly  distinctive.  The River  Severn  is a 
cross-boundary  feature  and the establishment  of a linear  Severn  Valley Heritage  Park to celebrate 
and promote  the Severn  Valley will be supported  through  the development  of supplementary 
guidance  on its landscape  character  and the designation  of the Severn  Valley Railway  as a 
Conservation  Area. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 82 A Unique  Place 10 Biodiversity  and Geodiversity 
Policy  SP.23 - Protecting  and Enhancing  Biodiversity 
1. The Council  will expect  proposed  developments  to deliver  measurable  net gains  in 
biodiversity  through  the promotion  and re-creation  of priority  habitats,  ecological 
networks  and the protection  and recovery  of legally  protected  and priority  species 
populations.  Delivery  of measurable  net biodiversity  gains  should  be designed  to 
support  the delivery  of the identified  biodiversity  network.  The level of biodiversity  net 
gain required  will be proportionate  to the type,  scale  and impact  of development. 
Enhancements  for wildlife  within  the built environment  will be sought  where  appropriate 
from all scales  of development. 
2. Where  required  proposals  for development  must  be supported  by an appropriate  level 
of up to date technical  ecological  assessment,  demonstrating  how ecological  features 
identified  have  influenced  the design  and layout. 
3. In these  circumstances  development  should  support  the conservation,  enhancement 
and restoration  of biodiversity  across  the Plan Area.  Specific  provisions  are identified 
below .  Full consideration  will be given  in making  planning  decisions  to the importance 
of any affected  habitats  and features,  taking  account  of the hierarchy  of protected  sites: 
a. Development  which  is likely  to have  an adverse  impact  on the integrity  of a Special 
Area  of Conservation  (SAC)  (including  candidate  SACs),  Special  Protection  Area 
(SPA) (including  candidate  SPAs), or other  international  designations  or the 
favourable  conservation  status  of European  or nationally  protected  species  or 
habitat  will not be permitted. 
b. Development  likely  to have  an adverse  effect on nationally  important  sites including 
a Site of Special  Scientific  Interest  (SSSI)  and irreplaceable  features  including 
(but not limited  to) ancient  woodland,  and ancient  or veteran  trees  will not be 
permitted,  except  where  the public  benefits  of the development  at that site clearly 
outweigh  the loss or deterioration  of habitat  and a suitable  compensation  strategy 
exists.   
c. Development  which  would  compromise  the favourable  condition,  (or make  it less 
likely  that favourable  condition  can be reached)  of a Local  Wildlife  Site (LWS),  a 
Grassland  Inventory  Site (GIS),  an important  individual  tree or woodland  and 
species  or habitats  of principal  importance  recognised  in the Worcestershire 
Biodiversity  Action  Plan,  or listed  under  Section  41 of the Natural  Environment 
and Rural  Communities  Act 2006,  will only be permitted  if the need  for and the 
public  benefits  of the proposed  development  outweigh  the loss.  
d. The ecological  network  of wildlife  corridors  that link the biodiversity  areas  detailed 
above,  including  areas  identified  for habitat  restoration  and creation  will be 
protected. 
e. Where  the policy  requirements  of b and c and d have  been  met, full compensatory 
provision,  to include  establishment  (secured  through  a legal  agreement  where 
appropriate)  commensurate  with the ecological  value  of the site will be required. 
In the first instance  this should  be through  on-site  mitigation,  the details  of which 
Wyre Forest  District 
83 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place should  be agreed  with the Local  Planning  Authority . Off-site  mitigation  will only be 
acceptable  where  on-site  mitigation  is shown  not to be possible. 
4. The development  will secure  the management  and monitoring  of biodiversity  of features 
retained  and enhanced  within  the site or for those  features  created  off-site  to 
compensate  for development  impacts  for a period  reasonably  related  to the lifetime  of 
the development. 
5. Where,  having  followed  the mitigation  hierarchy , there  is an unavoidable  requirement 
for offsite biodiversity  compensation  to offset harm,  applicants  will be expected  to 
demonstrate  that this will be brought  forward  at a scale  and proximity  to the proposed 
development  in keeping  with the harm  caused.  Where  pooled  off-setting  is required 
for multiple  sites compensation  will need  to be proportionally  supported  in scale  and 
kind by the project  proposer(s). 
6. Proposals  for new housing  development  should  ensure  that the development  (including 
gardens)  are permeable  to native  wildlife  (such  as small  mammals,  reptiles  and 
amphibians). 
Specific  details  relating  to the protection  and enhancement  of biodiversity  and green 
infrastructure  within  the District  will be set out in a Green  Infrastructure  Supplementary 
Planning  Document  (SPD).   
Reasoned  Justification 
10.30  The importance  of protecting  and enhancing  biodiversity  occurring  outside  designated 
sites is recognised  in European  and national  law and in the NPPF . In particular , guidance  reflects 
the need  to maintain  functioning  ecological  networks  at the landscape  scale  together  with 
irreplaceable  habitats  and biodiversity  features  which  may not necessarily  be covered  by a 
formal  designation  but which  may be highly  susceptible  to in-combination  and cumulative  effects 
such  as lighting,  noise  and disturbance.  The Council  will therefore  expect  developments  to be 
informed  by an understanding  of the site within  its local ecological  context.  This comprises  the 
mappable  network  of designated  and undesignated  features  and interlinking  features  within  the 
landscape,  including  non-designated  and non-priority  habitats  such  as road verges,  hedgerows 
and trees  outside  woodland.  The relevant  ecological  network  will draw  from readily  accessible 
evidence  sources  including,  but not limited  to, the Worcestershire  Green  Infrastructure 
Framework,  Worcestershire's  Biodiversity  Delivery  Areas,  the Worcestershire  Habitat  Inventory 
and Worcestershire  Biodiversity  Action  Plan. 
10.31  As well as sites which  are protected  by designations,  there  is also the potential  through 
development  to create  and enhance  other  sites.  These  additional  areas  may be smaller  'stepping 
stones'  forming  part of 'wildlife  corridors'  (both  blue,  green  and dark corridors  (see Glossary)) 
which  help to link sites into a more  comprehensive  and resilient  ecological  network.  This approach 
is embedded  within  NPPF  paragraphs  174, 175 and 179 which  require  Local  Authorities  to 
create  biodiversity  or ecological  networks.  The need  to maintain  and integrate  dark corridors 
within  wildlife  corridors  is discussed  in more  detail  in the GI Concept  Plans. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 84 A Unique  Place 10 10.32  Ancient  woodland  and veteran  trees  are an irreplaceable  and intrinsic  feature  of Wyre 
Forest's  ecological  network,  their importance  is recognised  within  NPPF  paragraph  180(b)  and 
a strong  commitment  for their protection  is expressed  within  DEFRA's  25 year plan.  Due to their 
historical  significance,  veteran  trees  are to be considered  heritage  assets  (NPPF  Section  16). 
Natural  England  guidance  on ancient  woodland  and veteran  trees  (18)  states  that mitigation 
measures  could  include  leaving  an appropriate  buffer zone  of semi-natural  habitat  between  the 
development  and the ancient  woodland  or veteran  tree. The actual  size of the buffer depends 
on the type of the development,  the type of woodland  and what  the likely  impact  would  be, but 
as a minimum  it should  be at least  15 metres.  For veteran  trees,  where  a more  precautionary 
approach  is warranted,  the distance  should  be greater  than the standard  minimum  buffer. 
10.33  Where  development  proposals  may affect biodiversity  assets,  including  ancient 
woodlands,  veteran  trees  and their immediate  surroundings,  the following  principles  shall be 
used  to guide  the design  of development: 
Avoid harm 
Provide  unequivocal  guidance  of need  and benefits  of proposed  development 
Provide  biodiversity  net gain 
Establish  likelihood  and type of any impacts 
Implement  appropriate  and adequate  mitigation  and compensation 
Provide  adequate  buffers 
Provide  adequate  evidence  to support  proposals 
Source:  The Planners'  Manual  for Ancient  Woodland  and Veteran  Trees (Woodland  Trust, 2017) 
10.34  Impact  assessments  and evidence  of biodiversity  net gain must  use the DEFRA 
biodiversity  metric  or similar  metric  subject  to the prior written  approval  of the Local  Planning 
Authority . Mitigation  strategies  must  be informed  by an appropriate  level of technical  study 
reasonably  related  to the scale  of unmitigated  impact  anticipated  and risks posed.  The 
effectiveness  of mitigation  and compensation  measures  is critical  in ensuring  protection  and 
enhancement  of the integrity  of biodiversity  networks.  The Council  will expect  that wherever 
possible  biodiversity  measures  in relation  to habitats  and species  will be subject  to reasonable 
monitoring  effort related  to their scale  and complexity . 
10.35  The garden  boundaries  of new housing  developments  should  be appropriately  designed 
to ensure  there  is ecological  permeability  for wildlife  species  such  as hedgehogs,  nesting  birds, 
roosting  bats,  invertebrates  etc. This is to ensure  the protection  and enhancement  of existing 
wildlife  corridors  and the provision  of new connections  across  the site. This can be achieved  in 
new housing  developments  by ensuring  garden  boundaries  include  at least  a 125mm2 (5 inch2) 
holes/gap  in garden  fences  and walls  to allow  access  for wildlife,  such  as hedgehogs,  frogs  and 
toads.  The use of hedgehog  shelters,  nesting  boxes  and bug hotels  (e.g. installed  on buildings 
and fence  posts),  to provide  food and nesting  opportunities  is encouraged.  Developers  will be 
required  to provide  an information/welcome  pack,  and have  a special  sign installed,  so new 
residents  understand  the importance  of maintaining  wildlife  corridors  and why they should  not 
18 Natural  England  guidance  - Ancient  woodland  and veteran  trees:  protecting  them  from development 
https://www .gov.uk/guidance/ancient-woodland-and-veteran-trees-protection-surveys-licences 
Wyre Forest  District 
85 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place be blocked.  Information  for developers  on how to create  hedgehog  highways  and why they are 
important  can be found  at the Hedgehog  Street  Campaign  website: 
http://www .hedgehogstreet.org/development/. 
10.36  The District  Council  will seek to progress  a Green  Infrastructure  Supplementary  Planning 
Document  (SPD)  in order  to provide  a holistic  approach  to the provision  of green  infrastructure 
and to maximise  the many  benefits  that green  infrastructure  brings.  The SPD will set out specific 
requirements  for the protection  and enhancement  of biodiversity  and green  infrastructure  within 
the District  up to 2036. 
10.37  Wyre Forest  District  has a range  of nationally  and locally  important  sites.  The NPPF 
provides  the context  for conserving  biodiversity  and this Local  Plan protects  the relevant 
designated  sites through  identifying  them  on the Policies  Map.  The designated  sites are also 
set out in the table  below . Additional  sites may be designated  during  the lifetime  of the Local 
Plan. 
10.38  The River  Severn,  Severn  Estuary  and tributaries  provide  a route  for migratory  fish 
forming  part of the reasons  for the Severn  Estuary's  designation  as a Special  Area  of 
Conservation  and Ramsar  Site. The Severn  Rivers  Trust has been  established  to promote 
projects  to improve  fish passage  along  the Severn  and to develop  greater  use of the Rivers 
Severn  and Teme by local people  and visitors.  Development  that may have  direct  or indirect 
impacts  on watercourses  used  by the SAC and Ramsar  species  will be subject  to a Habitats 
Regulations  Assessment  (HRA). 
Table 10.4.1  Important  sites  for Biodiversity 
 Sites  Designation 
 Areas  of National 
Importance: 
Chaddesley  Woods  NNR  and Feckenham  Forest  SSSI  - A large  semi-natural 
ancient  woodland  and species-rich  unimproved  grassland. 
Sites  of Special 
Scientific  Interest 
(SSSI) Wyre Forest  SSSI  and NNR  - One of the largest  and most  important  ancient 
woodlands  in England,  including  woodland,  scrub,  springline  flushes,  streams, 
grassland  and orchards;  and incorporating  several  outlying  areas. 
Areley  Wood SSSI  - A large  ancient  semi-natural  woodland. National  Nature 
Reserves  (NNRs) 
 Devil's  Spittleful  and the Rifle  Range  SSSI  and nature  reserve. 
Other  Areas  of 
National 
Importance 
Hartlebury  Common  and Hillditch  Coppice  SSSI  -The County's  most 
important  lowland  heaths,  which  are a nationally  and internationally  scarce 
habitat. 
Hurcott  and Podmore  Pools  SSSI  - The County's  largest  alder  woodland. 
Kinver  Edge  SSSI  - Woodland,  heathland  and geology . 
Puxton  Marshes,  Stourvale  Marshes,  and Wilden  Marsh  and Meadows 
SSSIs  - The County's  most  important  marshlands,  adjoining  the River  Stour . 
Showground  Meadow , Callow  Hill SSSI  - Meadows. 
Ranters  Bank  Pastures  SSSI  - Grassland  and traditional  orchard. 
Eymore  Cutting  and River  Stour  Flood  Plan  SSSIs  - Sites  of geological 
interest. 
Dumbleton  Dingle  SSSI  - Broadleaved,  mixed  and yew woodland  - lowland. 
Hurcott  Pasture  SSSI  - A species-rich  lowland,  acidic  grassland  pasture. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 86 A Unique  Place 10  Sites  Designation 
 Local  Nature  Reserves:  Areas  of Regional, 
County  or Local 
Importance 
  
Burlish  Top (between  Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn)  & Habberley 
Valley  (to the Northwest  of Kidderminster)  - Part of the County's  most  important 
complex  of lowland  heaths,  which  is a nationally  and internationally  sacred 
habitat.  Habberley  Valley also includes  woodland  and acid grassland. 
Blake  Marsh,  Spennells  Valley  and Redstone  (Kidderminster  and 
Stourport-on-Severn)  - Marshlands. 
Hurcott  Woods  (Kidderminster) 
Vicarage  Farm  Heath/Whittall  Drive  West (Birchen  Coppice  Estate, 
Kidderminster) 
Half Crown  Wood (Walshes  Estate,  Stourport-on-Severn) 
Moorhall  Marsh  (Stourport-on-Severn  riverside) 
Kingsford  Forest  Park  - Wolverley 
Hartlebury  Common  - Stourport-on-Severn  (immediately  adjacent  to district 
boundary) 
 Other  Potential  LNRs: 
Blakedown  Valley  (Blakedown) 
Hoobrook  Valley  (Kidderminster) 
Mitton  Marsh  (Timber  Lane/River  Stour , Stourport-on-Severn) 
Other  Nature  Reserves: 
 Worcestershire  Wildlife  Trust: 
Betts  Reserve  (Far Forest) 
Bishops  Meadow  (Wolverley) 
Devil's  Spittleful  (Kidderminster  fringe) 
Knowle's  Coppice  (the Wyre Forest) 
Wilden  Marsh  (Stourport-on-Severn) 
 Woodland  Trust: 
Verflores  Wood (Pound  Green) 
Wassell  Wood (Kidderminster  Foreign) 
 Forest  Enterprise: 
Wyre Forest  Nature  Reserve  (the Wyre Forest) 
 Important  Arboreta: 
Arley  House  (Upper  Arley)  - Registered  Park and Garden 
Bodenham  (Wolverley) 
Local  Wildlife  Sites: 
A network  of 58 sites throughout  the District  that includes  the Rivers  Severn  and 
Stour  and a number  of brooks,  streams  and pools  as well as Ribbesford  woods  and 
Arley  Wood and Eymore  Wood. 
Wyre Forest  District 
87 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place  Sites  Designation 
Additional  sites shown  on the Policies  Map Natural  Space  - Sites 
of biodiversity  and 
conservation 
importance   
Geodiversity 
Policy  SP.24 - Protecting  and Enhancing  Geodiversity 
1. New development  must  strive  to enhance  and not have  a detrimental  impact  on the 
geodiversity  of the District 
2. Where  relevant,  development  proposals  should: 
a. make  a positive  contribution  to the protection  and enhancement  of geodiversity; 
b. identify , maintain  and appropriately  manage  geodiversity  assets; 
c. actively  contribute  to the implementation  of Geodiversity  Action  Plans  (GAPs)  at 
the national,  regional  or local level. 
Reasoned  Justification 
10.39  Geodiversity  is a fundamental  cornerstone  of our everyday  lives.  Geology  affects  where 
we build,  how we construct  buildings  and how we deliver  associated  services.  It influences  the 
design  and layout  of infrastructure,  filters  our drinking  water  and underpins  the landscape  around 
us. Geodiversity  cannot  be replaced  or recreated  (other  than on geological  timescales). 
10.40  Geodiversity  may be defined  as the range  of rocks,  fossils,  minerals,  landforms  and 
soils that occur  on our planet  along  with the natural  processes  that shape  the landscape.  The 
geodiversity  of the District  plays  a major  role in influencing  and supporting  its biodiversity . 
10.41  National  planning  policy  is clear  that Local  Planning  Authorities  should  protect  and 
enhance  geodiversity . Geodiversity  sites with existing  or proposed  European  or national 
designations  are Sites  of Special  Scientific  Importance  and subject  to statutory  protection.  The 
Council  will protect  and enhance  geodiversity  designations  within  the District  and will continue 
to work with the local Geodiversity  Partnership  to promote  geodiversity . Geodiversity  designations 
are shown  on the Policies  Map and are set out in the table  below . Additional  sites may be 
designated  during  the lifetime  of the Local  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 88 A Unique  Place 10 Table 10.4.2  Geodiversity  Designations 
 Details  Type 
 Local  Geological  Sites 
 Bark  Hill (Bewdley)  - Eturia  Marl Formation  and Upper  Coal Measures. 
Bewdley  Road  cutting  (Wribbenhall)  - Bridgnorth  Sandstone  Formation. 
Bewdley  Road  cutting  (Kidderminster)  - Kidderminster  Formation. 
Blackstone  Rock  - River  cliffs, Bridgnorth  Sandstone  and Kidderminster 
Formations. 
Hartlebury  Common  - Quaternary  late glacial  and post-glacial  wind blown 
sand. 
Hextons  Farm  Quarry  - Upper  Carboniferous,  Salop  Formation  - Alveley 
member . 
Worcester  Road  (Hoobrook)  - Wildmoor  Sandstone  Formation. 
Eymore  Railway  Cutting  - Carboniferous,  Westphalian  Formation. 
Redstone  Rock  - Triassic,  Sherwood  and Sandstone  Group,  Wildmoor 
Sandstone  Formation. 
Leapgate  Old Railway  Line and Quarry  (Country  Park). 
Additionally , the Council 
considered  that areas  of at least 
local geological  or 
Arley  Station  railway  cutting  - Upper  coal measures. 
Habberley  Valley  - Permo-T riassic  Sandstones. 
Vales Rock  (Kingsford)  - Permo-T riassic  Sandstones. 
geomorphological  importance  exist 
at various  locations,  including  the 
following: 
Wilden  Lane  - river terraces  and gravel  deposits. 
10.42  Geodiversity  sites should  also be recognised  for their importance  in providing  habitats 
for biodiversity  and in allowing  delivery  of ecosystem  services. 
10.43  Where  appropriate,  access  for all should  be provided  to geodiversity  sites,  although  it 
is recognised  that this is not always  desirable.  Geological  sites will require  appropriate 
maintenance  regimes  to ensure  that these  assets  are properly  protected  and managed. 
10.44  The local Geodiversity  Partnership  will identify , map and regularly  review  the priorities 
for protection  and improvement  throughout  Worcestershire  County . These  will be used  to inform 
planning  decisions.  See Herefordshire  & Worcestershire  Earth  Heritage  Trust for further  details: 
http://www .earthheritagetrust.org/pub/ 
Wyre Forest  District 
89 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 10 A Unique  Place Regenerating  the Waterways 
Policy  SP.25 - Regenerating  the Waterways 
1. Rivers 
All proposals  for development  in or adjacent  to the District's  rivers  and/or  within  an area at 
risk of flooding  must  also conform  with Policy  SP.31. Rivers  are to be enhanced  in 
accordance  with Green  Infrastructure,  Biodiversity  and Water Management  Policies. 
Development  which  opens  up views  and enhances  the landscape  and biodiversity  of the 
River  Stour  in Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn  will be encouraged. 
Development  which  preserves  and enhances  the historic  riverside  character  of the Bewdley 
Conservation  Area  will be encouraged. 
Development  proposals  which  preserve  and enhance  the character  of the Stourport  No.1 
Conservation  Area  adjacent  to the River  Severn  will be encouraged. 
2. Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal 
Developments  and initiatives  that make  a positive  contribution  to the creation  of an attractive 
and high quality  canal-side  environment  will be supported. 
Reasoned  Justification 
10.45   Two of the District's  three  main  waterways  (the River  Stour  and the Staffordshire  and 
Worcestershire  Canal)  pass  through  Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn,  whilst  the principal 
river, the Severn,  passes  through  both Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley . 
10.46  The canal  and rivers  are prominent  features  of the District  and, as well as helping  to 
shape  the area’ s past,  these  key distinctive  assets  have  great  potential  to act as catalysts  for 
local regeneration,  bringing  benefits  and influencing  the future  development  of the District. 
10.47  Proposals  for development  within  or adjacent  to the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire 
Canal  Conservation  Area  should  accord  with the most  up-to-date  Conservation  Area  Character 
Appraisal  and Management  Plan. 
10.48  This Policy  is to be read in conjunction  with Policies  SP.31 and DM.28  (Wyre Forest 
Waterways). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 90 A Unique  Place 10 11.1 The assessment  of infrastructure  requirements  set out in this Local  Plan has been  carried 
out by the Council  in close  consultation  with infrastructure  providers,  including  the County 
Council.  Worcestershire  LEP and the Greater  Birmingham  and Solihull  LEP have  also been 
consulted  to secure  maximum  alignment  on the priorities  for infrastructure  in Wyre Forest.  The 
partner  authorities  intend  to explore  a range  of funding  mechanisms  to finance  the infrastructure 
requirements  of Wyre Forest. 
11.2 The Council  will consider  wider  infrastructure  funding  streams  as part of the delivery  of 
the Local  Plan.  Following  the adoption  of the Local  Plan,  the Council  will consider  the introduction 
of a Community  Infrastructure  Levy  in conjunction  with the latest  Planning  Obligations 
SPD adopted  by the Council. 
Policy  SP.26 - Strategic  Infrastructure 
1. The Council  will work  closely  with its partners,  especially  the County  Council,  to bring 
forward  the appropriate,  proportionate  and necessary  infrastructure  that is required  to 
deliver  the Plan. 
2. Development  will be required  to provide  or contribute,  financially  or in kind,  towards 
the provision  of infrastructure  needed  to support  it, subject  to viability  requirements 
designated  by the NPPF . 
3. Where  new infrastructure  is needed  to support  new development,  the infrastructure 
must  be operational  no later than the appropriate  phase  of development  for which  it is 
needed. 
4. Where  appropriate,  planning  obligations  will be required  to fund infrastructure  projects 
that are directly  related  to specific  development,  including,  but not limited  to, affordable 
housing,  transport,  green  infrastructure,  education,  health  and other  social  infrastructure. 
Reasoned  Justification 
11.3 Cross  reference  should  be made  to Policy  SP.27 Transport  and Accessibility .   
11.4 In the previous  Wyre Forest  Core  Strategy  and the subsequent  Development  Plan 
Documents,  much  of the development  was in the urban  areas  with a focus  on brownfield  sites. 
In this Local  Plan,  a different  pattern  of development  is required  with more  sustainable  urban 
extensions  on greenfield  sites and this is reflected  in the consequent  infrastructure  requirements. 
New development  requires  suitable  infrastructure  to integrate  it with existing  communities  and 
meet  the needs  of new residents  and businesses. 
11.5 The infrastructure  requirements  to support  the Plan are set out in the Wyre Forest 
Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan (WFIDP)  that was prepared  in spring  2017,  updated  in summer 
2019  and which  will be updated  regularly  throughout  the lifetime  of the Plan. 
11.6 The Council  and its partners  are committed  to the delivery  of infrastructure,  as set out 
in the WFIDP . The WFIDP  specifies  the requirements  for physical  infrastructure  (including 
transport  and utilities),  social  infrastructure  (including  education,  health),  and green  infrastructure 
Wyre Forest  District 
91 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 11 Strategic  Infrastructure (including  sport  and recreation  facilities).  The WFIDP  also contains  a spatial  description  of the 
infrastructure  requirements.  The WFIDP  is intended  to be a “living  document”  and will be updated 
as necessary  to support  the delivery  of this Plan. 
11.7 For the specific  infrastructure  requirements  related  to particular  sites,  reference  should 
be made  to the site specific  policies  contained  in Part C of this Plan,  where  appropriate.  For 
those  allocated  sites where  this Plan does  not contain  detailed  policy  guidance  on infrastructure 
provision,  a specific  assessment  of infrastructure  requirements  will be developed  by the Council 
in conjunction  with infrastructure  providers  and in liaison  with developers  when  development 
proposals  come  forward.  Reference  should  be made  to the most  current  version  of the WFIDP , 
which  will provide  assistance  in identifying  infrastructure  requirements  for these  sites. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 92 Strategic  Infrastructure 11 Policy  SP.27 - Transport  and Accessibility  in Wyre Forest 
Managing  Travel  Demand 
1. Proposals  must  demonstrate  that: 
a. the location  and layout  of development  will minimise  the demand  for travel; 
b. they offer viable  sustainable  transport  choices,  with a particular  focus  on active 
travel  modes  with attractive  and well-designed  walking  and cycling  networks; 
c. they address  road safety  issues; 
and in particular , 
d. they are consistent  with the delivery  of the Worcestershire  Local   Transport  Plan 
objectives. 
2. Travel  Plans  will be required  for all major  developments.  These  must  set out measures 
to reduce  demand  to travel  by private  cars and must  seek  to promote  and support 
increased  walking,  cycling  and public  transport  use  for a range  of trip purposes  through 
agreed  targets  and monitoring  arrangements.  The Travel  Plan must  follow  the guidance 
set out in national  planning  policy  and guidance,  including  the National  Design  Guide 
and the National  Model  Design  Code. 
3. New development  should  have  regard  to the principles  and design  criteria  set out in 
Manual  for Streets  1 and 2, the Worcestershire  Local  Transport  Plan compendium  and 
the Worcestershire  Streetscape  Design  Guide. 
Providing  Alternative  Modes  of Travel 
4. Priority  will be given  to improving  infrastructure,  technology  and services  to support 
active  travel  (walking  and cycling)  and passenger  transport  (bus,  rail and community 
transport)  during  the plan period.  In accordance  with Policy  SP.26 on Strategic 
Infrastructure,  development  will be expected  to contribute  to the provision  of sustainable 
transport  infrastructure,  technology  and services   necessary  to support  that 
development,  either  through  direct  investment  or by financial  contributions. 
5. In order  to promote  greater  transport  choice  in rural areas,  community  transport  and 
innovative  transport  projects,  including  those  that promote  the use of new vehicle 
technology , will be encouraged  in conjunction  with new development  proposals. 
Delivering  Transport  Infrastructure  to Support  Economic  Prosperity 
6. The following  transport  schemes,  as identified  within  the Worcestershire  Local  Transport   
Plan,  are the most  significant  for the successful  implementation  of the WFLPR: 
WFST  1: Kidderminster  Transport  Strategy  Major  Scheme. 
WFST  2; Transport  Telematics  Investment  Package  (all towns). 
WFST  3: Active  Travel  Corridor:   Bewdley  to Wyre Forest  (Dowles  Link). 
WFST  4: Mustow  Green  Junction  Enhancement  Scheme. 
WFST  5: Blakedown  Rail Station  Enhancement  Scheme. 
Wyre Forest  District 
93 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 12 Transport  and Accessibility The schemes  listed  in the Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley 
Packages. 
SWAT 10: Stourport  to Hartlebury  Station   (Leapgate  Line)  Active  Transport 
Corridor . 
In addition  schemes  will  require  implementation  to support  the level of development 
proposed  in the Local  Plan. 
7. Development  proposals  will not be permitted  if they are likely  to prejudice  the 
implementation  of the transport  schemes  set out in clause  F, the implementation  of 
identified  highway  improvements   or traffic management   schemes,  or the operation 
of existing  or proposed  public  transport  facilities. 
8. The following  sites and corridors  will be safeguarded  from development  that would 
prejudice  future  enhancement  of the rail network  and strategic  access  to it: 
Worcester-Kidderminster-  Stourbridge  junction  – Birmingham  Snow  Hill line. 
Severn  Valley Rail Line. 
Leapgate  Lane  former  rail alignment  (Stourport  to Hartlebury). 
Transport  Assessment  Strategy 
9. Transport  assessments  are required  for all major  developments  and must  be carried 
out in compliance  with relevant  national  and local policies  and guidance,  including  the 
Worcestershire  Local  Transport  Plan compendium. 
Freight  Proposals 
10. Any industrial  or commercial  development  that is likely  to generate  freight  movements 
of more  than 10 vehicular  trips per day will be required  to carry  out an assessment  of 
its impact  on the local road network  and environment  and the suitability  to accommodate 
the increased  traffic. Wherever  possible,  such  development  should  be located  on or 
near the principal  road network. 
Implementation 
11. Financial  contributions  from development  towards  transport  infrastructure  will be secured 
through  developer  contributions  subject  to viability  requirements  designated  by the 
NPPF  and, if appropriate,  the Community  Infrastructure  Levy  Charging  Schedule. 
Reasoned  Justification 
12.1 The Wyre Forest  Local  Plan Review  recognises  that the quality  of transport  provision 
and the accessibility  of the District  greatly  affect regeneration,  economic  diversification  and 
growth,  and the quality  of life of its residents  and visitors.  Traffic congestion,  in particular , is a 
major  cost to the local economy , has the potential  to constrain  future  growth,  and is a major 
cause  of environmental  pollution,  including  deteriorated  air quality  and ambient  noise,  especially 
within  the urban  areas. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 94 Transport  and Accessibility 12 12.2 There  are two Air Quality  Management  Areas  in the Wyre Forest  District:  one at Welch 
Gate  in Bewdley  Town Centre  and one at Horsefair/Coventry  Street  and the adjacent  section 
of Kidderminster  Ring Road.  Both locations  are particularly  challenging  to mitigate;  the former 
because  of historic,  dense  street  patterns  and the latter  because  of traffic volumes.  The 
introduction  of the Churchfields  Master  Plan scheme  will significantly  improve  Air Quality  in the 
Horsefair  area of the Kidderminster  Ring Road . In residents'  surveys,  concerns  regarding  traffic 
congestion  as well as the quality  of roads  and pavements,  sit second  only to crime  concerns  in 
relation  to satisfaction  with living  in the District. 
12.3 Sites  on the highway  network  such  as the A449  Worcester  Road,  the A451  Kidderminster 
Ring Road  and its approaches,  and the A448  between  Kidderminster  and Bromsgrove  suffer 
from significant  congestion  during  peak  times;  the A456  near the West Midland  Safari  and 
Leisure  Park suffers from high levels  of traffic in the summer  months,  when  visitor  numbers  are 
highest.  Furthermore,  the Kidderminster  Ring Road  creates  a barrier  and 'collar'  effect which 
deters  pedestrian  and cycle  journeys  to and from the town centre,  including  links to Kidderminster 
Railway  Station/SVR  on Comberton  Hill. 
12.4 Constrained  by its single  river crossing,  highway  network  and the location  of the main 
car parks  to the west of the town  centre,  high levels  of traffic are channelled  through  the historic 
centre  of Stourport-on-Severn.  These  high traffic levels  have  resulted  in borderline  Air Quality 
Management  Areas  and have  a detrimental  impact  on regeneration  proposals.  Bewdley  town 
centre  is also constrained  by its single  river crossing  and narrow  historic  street  pattern,  which 
results  in localised  congestion  and reduced  dispersal  of vehicular  emissions.  This has resulted 
in deterioration  in ambient  air quality  in Bewdley  Town Centre  and the designation  of the Air 
Quality  Management  Area  in Welch Gate. 
12.5 If traffic growth  trends  continue  with a reliance  on the private  car, many  more  of the 
District's  main  urban  and interurban  arterial  routes  will become  increasingly  impassable  due to 
congestion  beyond  traditional  peak  times.  Further  growth  in the District,  especially  as part of 
the regeneration  of key employment  and town centre  sites such as the Churchfields  development 
(Kidderminster),  has the potential  to exacerbate  traffic congestion  unless  delivered  in conjunction 
with investment  in transport  infrastructure,  technology  and services.  In addition  to private  cars, 
the poor performance  of the highway  network  in the form of congestion  has significant  impacts 
on the passenger  transport  network  (including  bus/rail  integration),  freight  and small  delivery 
movements,  taxis/private  hire journeys  and trips taken  by pedestrians  and cyclists. 
12.6 To tackle  traffic congestion,  significant  changes  in travel  patterns  and travel  behaviour 
are necessary  on a local neighbourhood  and District  wide level.  This will require  investment  in 
transport  infrastructure  and services,  and the adoption  of policies  that ensure  the closer 
integration  of land use and transportation  planning,  to help manage  demand  on the local transport 
network.  Specifically , a strong  focus  is required  on reducing  the need  to travel  and encouraging 
use of other  modes  of transport  (travel  choices),  especially  for shorter  trips,  to improve 
accessibility  and tackle  traffic congestion.  Nationally  and at the local level,  evidence  and 
experience  consistently  proves  that even  small  shifts  away  from single-occupancy  car use to 
walking,  cycling  and passenger  transport  can deliver  significant  improvements  to access  to key 
services  and facilities. 
Wyre Forest  District 
95 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 12 Transport  and Accessibility 12.7 The recent  completion  of the Hoobrook  Link Road  (opened  Sept 2016)  has helped  to 
ease  delays  along  the A451  Stourport  Road  corridor  and brought  significant  economic  benefits 
to the area;  however , traffic congestion  cannot  just be tackled  by building  new roads,  as this 
approach  is unaffordable  and unrealistic.  Investment  in transport  infrastructure,  technology  and 
services  across  all modes  of transport  will be required  to accommodate  the growth  in travel 
demand  without  increasing  travel  times,  congestion  and the associated  costs  that can undermine 
economic  performance. 
12.8 Traffic congestion  is a significant  challenge  for freight  movements  and networks,  and 
businesses  rely on this network  for access  to raw materials  and delivery  of finished  products. 
Reducing  delays  on the highway  network  to promote  consistently  reliable  journey  times  is 
especially  important  for road freight  operations  and to promote  economic  growth.  Tackling  'pinch 
points'  in the network  is very important  to the freight  sector , as is investment  in Intelligent 
Transport  Systems  (ITS).  At the hub of ITS is Urban  Traffic Management  Control  (UTMC),  which 
provides  the facility  to integrate  a wide variety  of information  on highway  network  conditions 
from numerous  sources/systems  to support  network  management  and provide  comprehensive 
travel  information  across  a wide range  of communication  channels.   
12.9 In addition  to road based  freight,  future  proposals  for employment  development, 
particularly  along  the Stourport  Road  Employment  Corridor , should  have  regard  to the possibility 
of utilising  the existing  rail infrastructure  for the sustainable  movement  of freight. 
12.10  To promote  further  development,  economic  growth  and tackle  traffic congestion,  the 
Wyre Forest  District  will need  to have: 
High-quality  active  travel  routes  and corridors  providing  for attractive  and well-designed   
walking  and cycling  networks  and direct  travel  choice  for shorter  distance  journeys, 
particularly  in urban  areas; 
Excellent  access  to rail stations  and improved  rail services; 
A convenient  and efficient  urban  passenger  transport  network; 
An efficient  highway  network  with good  links to the strategic  highway  network,  to enable 
the efficient  movement  of goods  and services  essential  to support  economic  activity  and 
growth. 
Highway  Network 
12.11 The District  does  not benefit  from direct  access  to the Strategic  Road  Network.  However , 
it does  have  connections  to the M5 corridor  through  the following  local principal  road network 
which  connects  to the M5 through  the identified  corridors  and junctions; 
A456  Corridor  – which  provides  access  to M5 Junction  3 (Quinton);   
A491  Corridor  – which  provides  access  to M5 Junction  4 (Lydiate  Ash);  and,  
A449  Corridor  – which  provides  access  to M5 Junction  6 (Worcester  North). 
12.12  These  connections  enable  the movement  of goods,  services  and freight  into and out 
of the district.  These  junctions  are also signed  for routeing  to the West Midland  Safari  and 
Leisure  Park and Severn  Valley Railway  which  are national  tourist  destinations  and important 
to the regional  economy .  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 96 Transport  and Accessibility 12 12.13   Whilst  it is noted  that the Wyre Forest  Local  Plan will increase  potential  trips on the 
Strategic  Road  Network,  the impact  is considered  minor . However , cumulatively  with further 
housing  and employment  growth  in Birmingham,  Black  Country , Bromsgrove  and South 
Worcestershire  it is likely  that improvements  will be required  at these  junctions.   
12.14  Therefore,  Highways  England,  who maintains  and manages  the M5 Corridor , continues 
to work  with Worcestershire  County  Council,  and other  key stakeholders  to identify  and develop 
improvement  schemes  and funding  opportunities  at these  locations,  to enable  the growth  across 
this area to be accommodated  within  the operational  capacity  of the Strategic  Road  Network. 
12.15  The District  does  not benefit  from local access  to the motorway  network  (M5);  however , 
M5 Junction  3 and 4 provide  access  from Wyre Forest  District  and the rural hinterland  to the 
Strategic  Road  Network  for journeys  by road.  They  provide  connections  to the wider  West 
Midlands  Conurbation  and wider  Worcestershire.  This in turn provides  access  to  the local 
principal  road network. 
12.16  The main  highway  corridors  are: 
A442  - runs north/south  through  the District  and Kidderminster  town  centre  linking  Droitwich 
and Bridgnorth; 
A448  - runs Kidderminster-  Bromsgrove-Redditch; 
A449  - runs north/south  through  the District  and the eastern  side of Kidderminster  town 
centre,  linking  Worcester  and Wolverhampton; 
A450  – runs in the south  of the District  linking  Stourbridge  and Hagley  to Torton,  near 
Hartlebury; 
A451  - runs north/south  through  the District  and Kidderminster  town  centre  (incorporating 
the Kidderminster  Ring Road)  linking  Stourport-on-Severn  and Stourbridge; 
A456  - runs east/west  through  the District  providing  the main  route  from the West Midlands 
conurbation  to Kidderminster , Bewdley  and on to the Marches. 
12.17  There  are significant  challenges  with traffic congestion  in Kidderminster  and Stourport 
town  centres  in particular  and intervention  is needed  to support  regeneration,  economic 
diversification  and growth.  This will require  new active  travel  links and potentially  the construction 
of some  new sections  of highway  and alterations  and improvements  to existing  roads  and 
junctions,  if these  can be justified.  In particular , focus  is needed  to enhance  the performance 
of 'pinch-points'  on the existing  transport  network  where  journey  times  and costs  are increasing. 
The recent  opening  of the Hoobrook  Link Road  has released  capacity  on the A451  Stourport 
Road  corridor  which  may offer opportunities  for infrastructure  enhancements  to benefit  buses, 
pedestrians  and cyclists. 
12.18  There  are a number  of 'pinch  points'  on the inter-urban  highway  network  such  as the 
junction  of the A448  and A450  at Mustow  Green,  where  significant  investment  is required  to 
improve  the efficiency  of the junction  to cater  for existing,  and the forecast  increase,  in traffic 
demand.  Development  in intelligent  transport  systems  (telematics),  such  as Variable  Message 
Signs  and Real Time Information  Systems,  will increasingly  have  a role in managing  demand 
on the highway  network  and investment  will be required  to develop  and maintain  these  systems 
so that the network  functions  more  efficiently . 
Wyre Forest  District 
97 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 12 Transport  and Accessibility Rail Network 
12.19  There  are two rail stations  within  the District,  Kidderminster  and Blakedown,  both 
providing  important  links with the West Midlands  conurbation  and Worcester;  there  are also 
direct  trains  from Kidderminster  to London  (Marylebone)  via Birmingham  Snow  Hill. Whilst 
having  a good  service  to Birmingham  and Worcester , Kidderminster ’s connectivity  southwards 
from Worcester  depends  upon  the 2-hourly  frequency  Great  Malvern-Bristol  service  and 
connectivity  at Cheltenham  Spa, with the result  that it is often  quicker  and faster  to travel  to 
destinations  south  of Worcester  via Birmingham  City Centre.  Northbound  journeys  from 
Kidderminster  require  a change  either  between  Birmingham  Snow  Hill/Moor  Street  and 
Birmingham  New Street  or at Smethwick  Galton  Bridge. 
12.20  Kidderminster  Rail Station  is the second  busiest  in Worcestershire,  representing  nearly 
20% of all rail travel  in the County , dominated  by commuter  flows  into Birmingham.  The service 
provides  valuable  links for employment,  retail,  leisure  and education,  and is well used  in both 
directions,  with the highest  demand  during  weekday  peak  periods.  It is recognised  however , 
that the facilities  at Kidderminster  Rail Station  need  to be improved  and investment  is necessary 
for enhancements  to cater  for the expected  doubling  of passenger  numbers  by 2043. 
12.21  The Worcestershire  Local  Enterprise  Partnership  (WLEP)  Strategic  Economic  Plan 
(SEP)  highlights  a number  of challenges  facing  the County  and notes  that “there  is considerable 
scope  to enhance  Worcestershire’ s rail infrastructure  and services”.  In the SEP there  is clear 
commitment  to support  the Kidderminster  Rail Station  Enhancement  scheme  as a short-term 
‘Local  Growth  Fund’  initiative,  to actively  improve  accessibility  to and from the County  by rail, 
and reduce  reliance  on private  car travel. 
12.22  The proposed  enhancements  include  a new station  building  and improved  access  for 
all modes  that provides  a high quality  transport  gateway  to Kidderminster  and the Wyre Forest 
that is better  integrated  with the Severn  Valley Railway  (SVR)  and other  key business  and tourist 
destinations.  To maximise  the benefits  of the Rail Station  enhancements,  it is vital that investment 
go toward  measures  to enhance  rail integration  and active  mode  improvements;  in particular , 
toward  improved  walking  and cycling  links into and through  Kidderminster  town  centre  and 
surrounding  residential  areas.  This recognises  that increased  demand  to travel  cannot  be met 
by the car alone;  travel  choice  is essential  to support  sustainable  growth  of rail patronage  in 
the longer  term. 
12.23  To complement  the planned  enhancements  to Kidderminster  Rail Station  and rail 
connectivity  for the District,  the emerging  Worcestershire  County  Council  Rail Investment 
Strategy  includes  evidenced  aspirations  for the following  rail access  improvements: 
Extending  London  Paddington-W orcester  services  to Droitwich  Spa and Kidderminster; 
Provision  of a new direct  train service  between  Kidderminster , Worcester , Cheltenham 
Spa, Gloucester , Bristol  Parkway  and Bristol  Temple  Meads. 
12.24  The emerging  Rail Investment  Strategy  also highlights  the need  to address  poor journey 
times  between  Kidderminster  and Birmingham,  where  the average  travelling  speed  is just 33mph. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 98 Transport  and Accessibility 12 12.25  Although  patronage  is relatively  low at Blakedown  Station,  it is recognised  that 
investment  is required  to cater  for the significant  forecast  growth  in rail travel  with enhancements 
required  to include: 
Improvements  to passenger  information  and station  facilities  for passengers; 
Improvements  to walking/cycling  routes  to the station; 
Improvements  to access  arrangements  for cyclists  and provide  additional  new cycle  storage 
facilities; 
Set-down  and pick-up  facilities  for taxi users  and operators; 
Improve  facilities  for passengers  with disabilities; 
Provision  of suitably  sized  station  car park. 
12.26  The opportunities  to increase  car parking  provision  at Kidderminster  Rail Station  are 
limited  and so improving  parking  provision  at the alternative  stations  (Blakedown  and Hartlebury) 
will be essential  to support  anticipated  rail growth  in the Wyre Forest. 
12.27  The South  Worcestershire  Transport  Strategy  (covering  the City of Worcester , Wychavon 
and Malvern  Hills Districts)  includes  aspirations  to enhance  facilities  and services  at Hartlebury 
Station  which  will offer increased  travel  and economic  growth  opportunities  for Wyre Forest 
District,  particularly  for residents  and businesses  in Hartlebury  and Stourport-on-Severn.  The 
proposals,  similar  in scope  to those  for Blakedown  Station,  suggest  enhancements  to facilities 
to cater  for the forecast  growth  in rail travel.  The Worcestershire  County  Council  LTP4 includes 
proposals  for the promotion  of 'Active  Travel  Corridors'  and a strategic  corridor  identified  is the 
Stourport  to Hartlebury  Station  (Leapgate  Line)  Active  Travel  Corridor . This Active  Travel  Corridor 
aims  to focus  investment  in walking  and cycling  links along  the corridor  to create  a 
comprehensive,  integrated  off-road  network  linking  residential  areas  with key trip attractors, 
including  rail stations. 
12.28  The Severn  Valley Railway  (SVR)  is one of the leading  heritage  railways  in the UK, 
operating  over a 16 mile route  between  Kidderminster  and Bewdley  to Bridgnorth  in Shropshire. 
The railway  is one of the major  tourist  attractions  in Worcestershire  with over 200,000  visitors 
annually . There  is potential  for connections  to the National  Rail network  at Kidderminster  Rail 
Station  to enhance  services  to/from  Bewdley . This would,  however , require  significant  investment 
and support  from the Department  of Transport  (DfT)  before  this could  be realised. 
12.29  As part of the 70 acre 'Silverwoods'  development  on the former  British  Sugar  site (A451 
Stourport  Road),  now accessed  via the new Hoobrook  Link Road,  works  are on-going  for a 
mixed  used  development  including  250 homes.  The outline  planning  consent  for 'Silverwoods' 
includes  provision  for a new rail halt on the nearby  SVR line to connect  to the SVR and National 
Rail services.  The viability  of such  a scheme  will require  further  investigation  before  it is 
considered  feasible. 
12.30  The West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park,  located  near the SVR line has ambitious 
plans  for growth.  The Park is keen  that the arrival  of HS2 in Birmingham  in 2026  may support 
further  visitor  volume  growth. 
Wyre Forest  District 
99 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 12 Transport  and Accessibility 12.31  Located  near Norton  in Wychavon  District,  the Worcestershire  Parkway  Major  Scheme 
involves  the development  of a new parkway  station  at the intersection  of the Bristol  to Birmingham 
and the Hereford  –Worcester-  London  main  line railways;  the station  is due for completion  during 
2019.   The poor quality  rail service  between  Kidderminster  and locations  served  by the 
Birmingham  - Cheltenham  - Gloucester  - Bristol  and Cardif f main  lines is exacerbated  by the 
lack of direct  access  to cross-country  services.  Worcestershire  Parkway  aims  to address  this 
issue  and improve  access  to national  rail services.  Parkway’ s location  close  to Junction  7 of 
the M5 will make  it a strategic  access  point  for the rail network  for much  of the County . It will 
have  500 car parking  spaces  and services  to Parkway  will initially  include: 
Hourly  GWR  Worcester  – London  Paddington  services; 
Hourly  Cross  Country  Cardif f – Nottingham  services. 
12.32  The Worcestershire  Parkway  Station  is likely  to offer increased  opportunities  for 
Kidderminster , Blakedown  and Hartlebury  Stations  in the future,  including  enhanced  links to 
regional  and national  economic  hubs  in London  and the South  East,  the South  West and South 
Wales. 
Road-Based  Passenger  Transport  Networks  (Bus,  Taxi and Community  Transport) 
12.33  The provision  of a high quality  road-based  passenger  transport  network  is critically 
important  for the social  and economic  wellbeing  of the District,  providing  essential  access  to a 
range  of health,  employment,  leisure,  education  and retail  opportunities  and services,  as well 
as rail hubs  which  provide  access  to a far greater  range  of destinations.  Road-based  passenger 
transport  plays  a significant  role in tackling  social  inequality  and, where  subject  to investment, 
can significantly  reduce  congestion  and promote  healthier  lifestyles.  The bus network  in the 
Wyre Forest  District  is predominantly  provided  by a single  operator , and has been  subject  to 
consistent  underfunding  for a number  of years.  The network  suffers from poor service  reliability 
and punctuality  due to traffic congestion  and a deteriorated  bus fleet,  lack of bus priority  measures 
and poor interchange  facilities  at the district's  rail stations.  In the Wyre Forest,  car ownership 
is lower  than in other  areas  of Worcestershire,  and particularly  so in some  of the more  deprived 
neighbourhoods.  In particular , certain  protected  groups  (the young,  the elderly  and the disabled, 
for example),  are particularly  dependent  on the bus network  to access  essential  services  and 
facilities  needed  to enjoy  an acceptable  quality  of life. Furthermore,  poor bus service  provision 
in the evenings  undermines  the viability  of the evening  economy . 
12.34  Kidderminster  bus station,  located  adjacent  to Weavers  Wharf  and delivered  as a 
purpose-built  facility  as part of that development,  has proved  unpopular  with local operators 
and so has been  largely  snubbed  in favour  of on-street  bus stop facilities.  It is necessary  to 
develop  a road based  passenger  transport  access  strategy  for Kidderminster  Town Centre  (bus, 
taxi and community  transport)  , to consolidate  and improve  the quality  of facilities,  as well as 
improving  ease  of interchange  for this mode  of transport.  The provision  of better  road based 
passenger  transport  services  and infrastructure,  including  bus priority  measures,  is a critically 
important  element  for better  accessibility  and economic  growth  in the District.  Investment  is 
also required  to enhance  transport  technology  such  as Real Time Information  systems  and 
more  comprehensive  integrated  ticketing  arrangements. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 100 Transport  and Accessibility 12 12.35  Whilst  most  of the population  of the District  reside  in the three  main  towns,  there  are 
rural hinterlands  and villages  whose  residents  are more  reliant  on the private  car than those  in 
the urban  areas.  In particular , the transport  needs  of the ageing  population  in rural areas  will 
be increasingly  difficult to meet,  as the numbers  of residents  without  access  to a car rises.  More 
demand-responsive  forms  of public  and community-based  transport,  such  as community  buses, 
dial-a-ride  cars and taxis,  will be required  if the needs  of these  residents  are to be met. 
Developments  in new technology  are likely  to enhance  the ability  of community  transport 
providers  to offer flexible,  accessible  and responsive  solutions  to unmet  local transport  needs. 
These  improvements  should  not only benefit  rural users  but residents  in those  urban 
neighbourhoods  where  conventional  passenger  transport  provision  is poor. 
Active  Travel  Modes  (Walking  and Cycling) 
12.36  Walking  and cycling  should  be a normal  part of everyday  life, and the natural  choice 
for shorter  journeys  such  as going  to school,  college  or work,  travelling  to the station,  and for 
simple  enjoyment.  Having  access  to safe and attractive  and well-designed  routes  for walking 
and cycling  with secure  cycle  parking,  is essential  to tackle  rising  obesity  and deteriorated  public 
health,  reduce  congestion,  improve  environmental  quality  and increase  civic pride  and wellbeing. 
12.37  Rising  obesity  in the District  is partly  caused  by sedentary  lifestyles,  so investing  in 
high quality , continuous  corridors  for active  travel  modes  (walking  and cycling)  will help to tackle 
this issue,  by providing  attractive  and well-designed  environments  and realistic  alternative  travel 
choices  for shorter  trips; 
12.38  The District  is suffering  the legacy  of a period  where  land use planning  tended  to favour 
the needs  of the motorist,  particularly  apparent  at the Kidderminster  ring road where  the 
pedestrian  and cycling  infrastructure  is of a poor quality .  Although  the majority  of roads  within 
the District  are available  to cyclists,  the speed  and volume  of traffic on some  roads  makes  them 
undesirable,  particularly  for new or less physically  able users.  There  have  been  improvements 
in walking  and cycling  infrastructure  in recent  years,  however , continued  investment  in active 
travel  modes,  as well as improvements  to the public  realm  in our urban  areas,  will help to 
encourage  more  uptake  of sustainable  modes  and reduce  dependency  on the private  car. 
Worcestershire  County  Council  Local  Transport  Plan  4: 2017-2030  (LTP4) 
12.39  The Local  Plan Review  provides  the main  opportunity  for the partners  to contribute  to 
the implementation  of the District's  transport  network;  the LTP4 and associated  policies  and 
overarching  strategies,  provide  the basis  on which  to develop  and deliver  this network.  It provides 
the policy  and strategy  context  for major  transport  projects  to enable  Worcestershire  County 
Council  to bid for additional  Government  funding.  It also provides  a context  within  which  developer 
contributions  can be guided.  The LTP4 document  states  that the challenges  for the District  are: 
To relieve  congestion; 
To improve  journey  time reliability; 
To deliver  transport  schemes  to mitigate  the effect of the local plan to accommodate 
development  growth. 
Wyre Forest  District 
101 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 12 Transport  and Accessibility 12.40  The LTP4 aims  to target  investment  in three  broad  areas: 
Transport  Technology  - technology  is offering  increasingly  attractive  opportunities  to help 
manage  demand  on our networks,  to tackle  congestion  and support  growth.  Modern  traffic 
signals,  for example,  can intelligently  manage  traffic flows  to respond  to variable  demand. 
Improved  access  to dynamic  travel  information  through  a variety  of media  will enable  users 
of our transport  networks  to make  more  informed  travel  choices; 
Travel  Choice  - increasing  realistic  travel  choice  is critical  to enable  our economy  to diversify 
and grow . In addition  to enhancing  access  to travel  information,  we recognise  that we need 
to prioritise  investment  in alternative  modes  of travel.  In particular , our rail network  has 
significant  potential  to accommodate  and support  economic  diversification  and planned 
growth.  Significant  investment  will be required  in our stations,  rail infrastructure  and rolling 
stock  to provide  the quality  of services  and facilities  that the 21st century  passenger  expects. 
Rising  obesity  in the county  is partly  caused  by sedentary  lifestyles,  so investing  in high 
quality , continuous  corridors  for active  travel  modes  (walking  and cycling)  as well as 
improvements  to the public  realm  in our urban  areas  will help to tackle  this issue,  by 
providing  attractive  and well-designed  environments  and realistic  alternative  travel  choices 
for shorter  trips; 
Capacity  Enhancement  - the most  expensive  of the three  areas,  where  suitable  business 
cases  can be identified  to support  investment,  we will aim to fund and deliver  capacity 
enhancements  at key 'pinch  points'  to support  development  growth,  address  poor air quality 
issues  and tackle  congestion. 
12.41  Detailed  plans  for the implementation  of transport  infrastructure  will come  forward 
during  the lifetime  of the LTP4 and their implementation  will be essential  to allow  for the further 
investment  in transport  infrastructure  and services  needed  to accommodate  the increased  travel 
demand  associated  with future  development  proposals.  The funding  to deliver  this transport 
infrastructure  is likely  to come  from a variety  of sources  and potential  funding  sources  include: 
Section  106 Planning  Obligations 
Other  developer  contributions; 
Community  Infrastructure  Levy; 
Integrated  Transport  Block 
Local  Growth  Deal 
12.42  Developers  will be required  to demonstrate  that they have  given  appropriate 
consideration  to the potential  impacts  of development  on the wider  and strategic  transport 
network,  including  that managed  by Worcestershire  County  Council,  Highways  England  and 
Network  Rail. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 102 Transport  and Accessibility 12 13.1 The enhancement  of the District’ s Green  Infrastructure  Network  will form a key part of 
the spatial  development  strategy  for the District.  This policy  places  an emphasis  on the delivery 
of a comprehensive  network  of green  spaces  and corridors  across  the District.  This will help to 
promote  active  lifestyles,  support  biodiversity , address  climate  change  and safeguard  and 
enhance  the District’ s unique  landscape  character . 
Policy  SP.28 - Green  Infrastructure 
1. The existing  green  infrastructure  (and associated  blue infrastructure)  network  will be 
safeguarded  from inappropriate  development. 
2. New development  will be expected  to retain,  protect,  enhance  and provide  Green 
Infrastructure  (GI) assets  (and associated  blue infrastructure)  by integrating  GI into 
developments  and contributing  positively  to the District's  green  infrastructure  network. 
Housing  and employment  development  proposals  (including  mixed  use schemes)  will 
be required  to contribute  towards  the provision,  maintenance,  improvement  and 
connectivity  of GI, directly  delivering  GI as part of their design  as follows,  subject  to 
viability  requirements  designated  by the NPPF: 
a. For Greenfield  sites exceeding  1ha (gross):  40% GI (excluding  private  gardens). 
b. For Greenfield  sites of less than 1ha but more  than 0.2ha  (gross):  20% GI 
(excluding  private  gardens). 
c. For Brownfield  sites:  no specific  GI figure.   However , mitigation  would  be expected 
if the proposed  development  will impact  negatively  on protected  environmental 
sites and/or  where  brownfield  sites have  a high environmental  value. 
3. Development  which  is unable  to retain,  protect  and enhance  the integrity  of the GI 
network  and its connectivity  or 'stepping-stone'  features  will be considered  inappropriate. 
Within  brownfield  developments  it is expected  that key GI features  such  as SuDs, 
green  roofs,  green  walls,  enhancements  to the District's  urban  and peri-urban  forest, 
and biodiversity  measures  will be delivered  wherever  possible  and integrated  into the 
wider  GI network. 
4. Within  the identified  key strategic  development  corridors  it is expected  that 
masterplanning  for all major  developments  will be informed  by the Green  Infrastructure 
Concept  Plans. 
5. The precise  form and function(s)  of the GI provided  will depend  on local circumstances 
and the Worcestershire  Green  Infrastructure  Strategy's  priorities.  Developers  should 
seek  to agree  these  matters  with the Council  in advance  of submitting  a planning 
application.  Effective  management  arrangements  should  also be clearly  set out and 
secured.  Once  planning  permission  has been  given  by the Council,  the associated  GI 
will be protected  as Natural  Space  or Open  Space  (see Policy  DM.7). 
6. Development  proposals  that would  have  a detrimental  impact  on important  GI attributes 
within  areas  will not be permitted  unless: 
Wyre Forest  District 
103 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 13 Green  Infrastructure a. A robust  independent  assessment  of community  and technical  environmental  need 
and functionality  shows  the specific  GI typology  to be surplus  to requirements  in 
that location   
b. Replacement  of, or investment  in, GI of at least  equivalent  quantity  and quality  of 
community  and technical  environmental  benefit  is secured  in a suitable  location 
agreed  with the LPA. 
7. To the north  of Kidderminster  Town Centre,  the Council  will safeguard  the areas  shown 
on the Policies  Map in the Stour  Valley for future  development  as a Country  Park. 
Proposals  for development  which  would  prejudice  the provision  of a Country  Park in 
these  areas  will not be permitted. 
8. The Council  will safeguard  and implement  a scheme  on land between  Kidderminster 
and Stourport-on-Severn  for development  as the Burlish  Country  Park,  as shown  on 
the Policies  Map.  Proposals  for development  which  would  prejudice  the provision  of 
the Country  Park in these  areas  will not be permitted.   
Reasoned  Justification 
13.2 The District  has a distinctive  environment  comprising  diverse  landscape  character  areas 
including  urban  areas.  There  are many  green  corridors  within  the District  which  are currently 
fragmented  but have  the potential  to provide  a comprehensive  network  of green  infrastructure 
(GI). The District's  watercourses  in particular  offer the opportunity  to link the urban  areas  with 
the open  countryside  beyond.  There  are also some  of the County's  most  important  and distinctive 
acid/lowland  heath  communities  and the continued  protection  and enhancement  of these 
important  areas  needs  to be considered  in future  development. 
13.3 The green  infrastructure  network  for the District  is set out within  the Green  Infrastructure 
Strategy  for Wyre Forest  District.  This Strategy  shows  how the District's  existing  green 
infrastructure  assets  can be better  linked  in order  to provide  greater  connectivity  for both people 
and nature. 
13.4 Worcestershire's  GI Strategy  and supporting  evidence  base  seeks  to enhance 
opportunities  to link biodiversity  with drainage,  historic  landscape  character  and improved 
accessibility . The Worcestershire  GI Strategy  promotes  the GI Concept  Plan approach  for 
strategic  sites and seeks  to promote  collaborative  working  with developers. 
13.5 The key objective  of Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Plans  is to establish  principles  for 
development  which  will identify  key GI assets  and opportunities  for their protection  and 
enhancement  in line with their surrounding  Environmental  Character  Area priorities,  local policies 
and the broader  Worcestershire  GI Framework.  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Plans  have  been 
developed  for each  of the identified  key strategic  development  corridors  within  Wyre Forest  and 
should  inform  masterplanning  exercises  of all major  developments  coming  forward  within  these 
corridors.  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Plans  have  been  produced  for the following  identified 
key strategic  development  corridors: 
Kidderminster  North  GI Concept  Plan 
Kidderminster  East GI Concept  Plan 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 104 Green  Infrastructure 13 Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and Waterfront  GI Concept  Plan 
South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park GI Concept  Plan 
13.6 The Council  requires  developers  to have  regard  to and contribute  towards  these  Green 
Infrastructure  Concept  Plans  for these  identified  key strategic  development  corridors.  The 
Council  has an aspiration  for developers  to prepare  a GI Concept  Plan for all large  scale 
developments,  which  would  then serve  to inform  all developments  in that area as they come 
forward. 
13.7 GI will need  to be carefully  planned  into new developments  from the outset.  When 
determining  planning  applications  the way in which  the proposals  contribute  to delivering  the 
GI network  will be of paramount  importance.  GI (and associated  Blue Infrastructure)  is an 
over-arching  approach  to secure  a range  of measures  already  required  and being  delivered  by 
development,  including:  formal  and informal  play areas,  sustainable  drainage  systems,  footpaths 
and bridleways,  public  open  space,  community  gardens,  living  walls,  wildflower  verges  and 
enhancement  of the District’ s urban  and periurban  forests  etc. For sake  of clarity:  this is not a 
requirement  to be considered  alongside  such  features,  but the GI target  in Policy  SP.28  should 
constitute  a quantitative  summation  of GI measures.  For GI to be deemed  of acceptable  quality , 
matters  including  multifunctionality , cohesion  and aftercare  also require  careful  consideration. 
Helpful  demonstration  of such  consideration  should  include  benchmarking  of development 
through  assessment  tools  such  as Building  with Nature  (www .buildingwithnature.org.uk/about). 
The GI Concept  Plans  and/or  a Supplementary  Planning  Document  will be of assistance  to 
developers  in crafting  robust  and effective  GI schemes.   
13.8 When  considering  GI on brownfield  sites no specific  figure  has been  set as such  sites 
can be relatively  constrained  by development  viability . Therefore  any GI provision  will be as a 
direct  consequence  of development  proposals  having  to meet  other  policy  requirements  as 
necessary  in order  to make  the development  acceptable  in planning  terms.  Where  proposed 
development  is likely  to impact  negatively  on protected  sites and/or  where  brownfield  sites have 
a high environmental  value  then appropriate  mitigation  measures  will be expected.  Brownfield 
habitats  qualifying  as Open  Mosaic  Habitat  or supporting  NERC  S.41 species  would  qualify  as 
a site offering  ‘high  environmental  value’.   
13.9 If a site is part brownfield  and part greenfield,  the GI % in 2(a) and 2(b) of Policy  SP.28  
should  be applied  depending  on the size of the greenfield  area.  For example,  if the greenfield 
area exceeds  1ha then 40% GI should  be applied.  If the greenfield  area is less than 1ha but 
more  than 0.2ha  then 20% is applied  (subject  to viability  requirements  designated  by the NPPF). 
13.10   Blue infrastructure  i.e. ‘blue’  landscape  elements  are linked  to water  such  as pools 
and wetland  systems,  artificial  basins  or watercourses.  Along  with green  infrastructure,  wildlife 
corridors  and dark corridors  they help form an interconnected  network  of environmental 
enhancements  within  and across  catchments. 
13.11 The delivery  of the Stour  Valley Country  Park is a long-standing  aspiration  for the 
District.  The completion  of the Kidderminster  Flood  Alleviation  Scheme  presents  the opportunity 
to create  a new country  park to the North  of Kidderminster . The creation  of a new country  park 
would  provide  a new link between  the town  centre  and the existing  green  corridor  running  from 
Wyre Forest  District 
105 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 13 Green  Infrastructure Springfield  Park,  Broadwaters,  and Hurcott  Pool via the important  wetlands  of the Stour  and 
Blakedown  Brook  Valleys.  The site will remain  safeguarded  in order  to allow  the future  delivery 
of the Stour  Valley Country  Park. 
13.12  The Policies  Map shows  land between  Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn  being 
safeguarded  as the Burlish  Country  Park.  Until 2016,  much  of this land was in use as a golf 
course.  The site returned  to local authority  ownership  in June  2018.  The Wyre Forest  Golf 
Facility  Review  (2019)  sets out why this golf course  is surplus  to requirements.  The long-term 
vision  for the site is to create  a Country  Park.  Parts  of the site have  now been  brought  under 
management  by the Council’ s ranger  service  to be managed  as a nature  reserve.  These  parts 
of the site will be managed  as an extension  to the adjacent  Burlish  Top Nature  Reserve.  The 
land has been  made  available  for public  access  with footpaths,  signage,  gates,  and fencing. 
Cattle  have  also been  brought  in to graze  the wildflower  meadow . A proposal  to develop  a 
cycling  route  on the land to the south  of Kingsway  is also being  discussed  with British  Cycling. 
Any funding  secured  would  be match  funded  from S106  contributions.  There  are also plans  to 
create  a new area of woodland  on 10ha  in conjunction  with the Woodland  Trust. A visitor  car 
park has been  provided  adjacent  to the Kingsway .  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 106 Green  Infrastructure 13 14.1 The purpose  of policies  relating  to water  is to ensure  that the integrated  management 
of water  resources  (water  supply , water  conservation,  water  quality  and waste  water)  is addressed 
as an integral  part of the planning  and design  of developments.  This includes  the mitigation  of 
flood  risk and surface  water  drainage  including  Sustainable  Drainage  Systems  (SuDS).  The 
Wyre Forest  Water Cycle  Study  considers  issues  of water  resources,  wastewater  and flood  risk 
and forms  a key part of the evidence  base  alongside  the Wyre Forest  Strategic  Flood  Risk 
Assessment  (2019). 
14.2 Strategic  issues  faced  by the District  affecting  the long term sustainability  of the local 
water  environment  include: 
The provision  for 5,520  new homes  and 29 hectares  of employment  land which  will have 
an impact  on water  resources  and its role in reducing  demand  on available  ground  water 
supplies; 
The distribution  and phasing  of development  sites to match  the available  capacity  of foul 
sewer  network  and waste  water  treatment  works  so that improvements  to be undertaken 
are in advance  of development; 
The need  to maintain  and replenish  ground  water  supplies,  reduce  flooding  and increase 
the use of Sustainable  Drainage  Systems; 
Addressing  watercourses  in the District  which  have  poor/moderate  water  quality  status 
under  the Water Framework  Directive  and the affect of development  and the quality  of 
waste  water  discharging  from local treatment  works. 
14.3 Policies  in this chapter  relate  to several  other  policy  areas  in the Local  Plan.  Addressing 
water  issues  in a comprehensive  and integrated  way will result  in more  effective  and sustainable 
solutions  to managing  water . 
14.4 To introduce  high levels  of water  efficiency , new development  is expected  to take all 
available  opportunities  to integrate  the principles  of sustainable  design  and construction  into 
the design  of proposals. 
Policy  SP.29 - Water Conservation  and Efficiency 
The Council  will require  development  to demonstrate  that it: 
a. Incorporates  design  features  that will reduce  water  consumption.  Proposals  for 
residential  development  will be expected  to demonstrate  that a water  efficiency  standard 
of 110 litres  per person  per day can be achieved;   
b. Incorporates  design  features  that will support  recycling  / re-use  of water  through 
measures  such  as rainwater  harvesting  and grey water  recycling,  especially  where  a 
large  demand  for water  is predicted  such  as industrial  processes  or irrigation. 
Wyre Forest  District 
107 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 14 Water Management Reasoned  Justification 
14.5 The Wyre Forest  area covers  surface  and groundwater  bodies  that are either  at risk of 
or have  been  impacted  by abstraction.  In areas  such  as this the Environment  Agency  is working 
with abstractors  including  water  companies  to reduce  the impact  of abstraction  on the 
environment  and bring  it to more  sustainable  levels.   
14.6 The Council  recognises  that from a sustainable  perspective,  water  should  be used 
efficiently  in order  to reduce  the associated  energy  requirements  (needed  to pump  water , for 
example)  and to avert  adverse  environmental  effects  such  as over-abstraction.  Improving  water 
efficiency  will also help to reduce  the volume  of wastewater  that the sewer  system  has to 
accommodate. 
14.7 STW  has made  demand  assumptions  based  on the increasing  levels  of water  efficiency 
in the design  of new homes  which  show  that water  consumption  per person  will drop from 120 
litres  per day (current)  to 109 litres  per day by 2034.  EA has expressed  support  for reducing 
consumption  of water  to a level of around  110 litres  per person  per day. 
14.8 Developers  of new dwellings  will be required  to demonstrate  that appropriate  measures 
to conserve  and re-use  water , such  as low flow showers  and kitchen  taps,  and provision  of 
water  butts  and rain/grey  water  harvesting  have  been  incorporated  to achieve  water  efficiency , 
working  to a limit of 110 litres  per person  per day or better . The additional  cost of meeting  this 
target  have  been  assessed  as being  as little as £9 per dwelling  (DCLG  Housing  Standards 
Review  (Sept  2014)). 
Policy  SP.30 - Sewerage  Systems  and Water Quality 
The capacity  and resilience  of local sewerage  infrastructure  is critical  to the sustainability 
of new development.  In order  to avoid  adverse  impacts  of additional  demand  on the existing 
foul sewerage  network,  the Council  requires  residential  development  to demonstrate: 
a. How foul flows  produced  by the development  will be drained  and the identification  of 
the agreed  point  of connection  to the public  foul sewerage  network; 
b. That sewerage  and surface  water  will drain  separately; 
c. How development  will be phased  to allow  Severn  Trent Water (STW)  sufficient  time 
to undertake  any necessary  capacity  improvement  works  to the public  foul sewer 
network  or to existing  waste  water  treatment  works  prior to construction  and occupation 
of the developments.  Where  development  is brought  forward  in advance  of planned 
capacity  improvements  by STW  through  the Asset  Management  Process,  any required 
capacity  improvements  should  be delivered  via agreement  between  the developer  and 
STW . 
Development  should  follow  the hierarchy  (order  of preference  for foul drainage  connection), 
as set out in the National  Planning  Practice  Guidance.  The Council  requires  non mains 
drainage  proposals  to assess  the potential  impacts  upon  water  quality  to ensure  no 
detrimental  impact  on the water  environment. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 108 Water Management 14 Proposals  that would  result  in an unacceptable  risk to the quality  and / or quantity  of a 
watercourse  or groundwater  body  will not be permitted.  Strategies  to help mitigate  the 
impact  of development  on water  quality  will be required  at planning  application 
stage.  Proposals  should  seek  opportunities  to improve  water  quality  and help achieve  good 
ecological  Water Framework  Directive  (WFD)  status. 
Reasoned  Justification 
14.9 A plan led approach  to the delivery  of development  is critical  to addressing  the capacity 
constraints  within  the District's  sewerage  and wastewater  treatment  infrastructure.  The main 
purpose  of Policy  SP.30 is to address  the alignment  of development  with the available  capacity 
at wastewater  treatment  works  and where  capacity  is constrained  ensure  that improvements 
can be made  prior to development  coming  forward. 
14.10  The Wyre  Forest  Water Cycle  Study  (2017,  and 2018  update)  shows  that although 
most  wastewater  treatment  works  have  capacity  to accommodate  additional  development  this 
available  capacity  is not distributed  evenly  and is not always  sufficient  to absorb  the planned 
levels  of development  for the area.  Phasing  development  across  the course  of the plan will 
allow  STW  to incorporate  improvements  into Asset  Management  Planning  delivering  key 
infrastructure  in advance  of development. 
14.11 Regular  reviews  of the Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan will help provide  STW  with information 
on any changes  to the phasing  of development,  to feed into their Asset  Management  Plans  in 
a timely  manner  allowing  opportunities  to re-deploy  resources  to better  meet  the needs  of 
emerging  development  patterns. 
14.12  Receiving  watercourses  and groundwater  bodies  covered  by the European  Union  Water 
Framework  Directive  (2000)  are subject  to a basic  requirement  of 'no deterioration'  and the 
objective  to reach  Good  Ecological  Status  or Potential  (GES/GEP)  by 2027.  It is essential  that 
all future  development  helps  to address  the issues  that currently  prevent  the watercourse  or 
groundwater  body  from achieving  GES/GEP . Water Framework  Directive  (WFD)  data is available 
from the Environment  Agency’ s Catchment  Data  Explorer  tool at: 
http://environment.data.gov .uk/catchment-planning/RiverBasinDistrict/9 
14.13  Strategies  to help mitigate  the impact  of development  on water  quality  will be required 
in advance  of planning  approval  being  granted  and could  include  on-site  measures,  such  as 
SuDS,  reinforcement  of wastewater  treatment  infrastructure,  restoring  natural  watercourses 
through  the removal  of culverts,  improvements  to habitats  and overcoming  barriers  to fish 
movement.  To protect  the receiving  water  environment  developers  are required  to set out how 
surface  water  from the development  will be treated  sufficiently , using  the simple  index  approach 
included  in the CIRIA  SuDS  Manual  (2015). 
Wyre Forest  District 
109 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 14 Water Management Policy  SP.31 - Flood  Risk  Management 
In line with the NPPF  and NPPG  the Council  will steer  new development  to areas  with the 
lowest  probability  of flooding.  In order  to minimise  the impacts  of and from all forms  of 
flooding,  the Council  requires  all development  in areas  thought  to be at risk of flooding  to: 
a. Ensure  development  proposals  are located  in accordance  with the Sequential  and 
Exception  Test where  appropriate  and also take account  of the latest  versions  of the 
Strategic  Flood  Risk Assessment,  the Worcestershire  Local  Flood  Risk Management 
Strategy , and the Worcestershire  Surface  Water Management  Plan. 
b. Submit  a site specific  Flood  Risk Assessment  (FRA),  which  confirms: 
i. the wider  hydrological  context  of the site. 
ii. the development  is safe from flooding  for its lifetime,  taking  into account  all forms 
of flooding.  This shall include  safe access  and egress. 
iii. finished  ground  floor levels  will be set a minimum  of 600 mm above  the 1% annual 
probability  (1 in 100 year)   river flood  level plus climate  change  allowance.  Where 
necessary  any flood  proofing/resistance  measures  are incorporated  into the design. 
iv. finished  ground  floor levels  will be set no lower  than the modelled  1% annual 
probability  (1 in 100 year)   surface  water  flood  level plus climate  change  allowance. 
v. the development  will not increase  the risk of flooding  elsewhere,   and proposals 
will detail  how existing  flood  flow paths  on the site will be accommodated,  how 
the amount  of flood  storage  will be maintained  and improved  (where  possible)  and 
how surface  water  runof f will be addressed. 
vi. any opportunities  for wider  flood  risk benefits 
vii. flood  management  and flood  warning  requirements 
viii. the development  layout  is informed  by the management  of residual  flood  risk and 
the drainage  strategy  for the site, which  incorporates  sustainable  drainage  systems 
(SuDS)  as set out in Policy  SP.32. 
The FRA shall use modelled  flood  level data where  possible  and shall take into account 
appropriate  allowances  for climate  change,  using  the latest  Environment  Agency's  local 
Climate  Change  Guide. 
Planning  permission  for development  will only be granted  where: 
c. The development  will be safe for its lifetime  taking  account  of the vulnerability  of its 
users,  without  increasing  flood  risk elsewhere,  and, where  possible,  will reduce  overall 
flood  risk in the area and beyond.  This will entail  evidence  showing  consideration  of 
wider  benefits  and opportunities,  including  from cumulative  impact  assessment,  to help 
ensure  development  will be safe and reduce  flood  risk in the catchment  where  possible. 
d. The natural  watercourse  and flood  plain  profiles  are not adversely  affected.  Where 
practicable,  any culverted  (piped)  watercourses  will be opened  up to improve  drainage 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 110 Water Management 14 and flood  flows.  Proposals  involving  the creation  of new culverts  will not be permitted 
unless  essential  to the provision  of access. 
e. A minimum  8 m access  strip is provided  adjacent  to watercourses  for maintenance 
purposes.  It should  be appropriately  landscaped  for biodiversity  benefits.  The width  of 
the strip may be reduced  for smaller  ordinary  watercourses,  where  agreed  by the Local 
Planning  Authority . 
Reasoned  Justification 
14.14  It is essential  that new development  minimises  its impact  on the built and natural 
environment.  This includes  reducing  risk of flooding  through  incorporating  features  such  as 
Sustainable  Drainage  Systems  (SuDS)  (Policy  SP.32). The purpose  of Policy  SP.31 is to take 
a proactive  approach  to managing  flood  risk from watercourses,  sewer , heavy  rainfall  and 
groundwater  sources. 
14.15  Areas  of the District  are subject  to regular  flooding  instances.  Certain  areas  are at risk 
of flooding  due to existing  drainage  systems  and watercourses  becoming  overwhelmed  during 
or following  heavy  rainfall,  whereas  areas  adjacent  to the River  Severn  are predominantly  at 
risk of flooding  following  prolonged  rainfall  outside  the District.  The Council  works  closely  with 
multiple  agencies  (including  the EA and STW)  to address  flooding  issues. 
14.16  The Local  Plan plays  an important  role by requiring  new developments  to provide 
integrated  flood  mitigation  methods  and by working  to retain  surface  water  runof f on-site  through 
sustainable  drainage,  integrating  flood  mitigation  measures  and providing  appropriate  buffering 
between  watercourses  and development.  Development  needs  to be resilient  to flood  risk and 
the effects  of climate  change  for its lifetime  by setting  appropriate  floor levels,  providing  safe 
pedestrian  and vehicle  access  and where  appropriate  provide  a flood  evacuation  management 
plan,  exceedance  route  plan and a SuDS  maintenance  plan. 
14.17  Development  can make  improvements  by reducing  the length  of culverted  watercourses. 
This can have  the added  benefits  of improving  access  to water  features,  improving  local habitats 
and using  water  bodies  as a catalyst  to enhance  the ecological  value  of an area.  The Council 
recognises  the value  of open  watercourses  on or adjacent  to development  sites as part of wider 
green  infrastructure  which  helps  improve  the health  and wellbeing  of residents  and visitors 
through  opportunities  for active  travel,  informal  recreation  and visual  amenity  in and around  the 
District's  extensive  Green  Network. 
Policy  SP.32 - Sustainable  Drainage  Systems  (SuDS) 
Effective  on-site  management  of surface  water  can improve  water  quality , water 
conservation,  the replenishment  of ground  water  supplies  and reduce  instances  of flooding. 
The Council  therefore  requires  all development  with surface  water  drainage  impacts  to 
ensure  that flows  and volumes  of surface  water  runof f leaving  a development  site do not 
exceed  Greenfield  levels.  For re-development  (Brownfield)  applications,  substantial 
Wyre Forest  District 
111 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 14 Water Management betterment  is expected  where  limiting  to Greenfield  levels  is deemed  not reasonably 
practicable.  Any surface  water  drainage  scheme  will be expected  to not adversely  affect 
the receiving  water  bodies,  both during  construction  and when  operational. 
The design  and development  of the site's  surface  water  drainage  scheme  should  include: 
i. Assessing  the potential  for management  of surface  water  to be wholly  or partially 
achieved  via infiltration. 
ii. Providing  Sustainable  Drainage  Systems  (SuDS)  for the management  of surface  water . 
The design  and construction  of the SuDS  should  be in line with the non-statutory 
technical  standards  for SuDS  (Defra,  2015)  and WFDC  SuDS  Design  and Evaluation 
Guide  (2017).  The SuDS  design  should  also make  allowances  for: 
Climate  change,  in line with the latest  Government's  Climate  Change  Allowances 
guidance. 
Future  development  in residential  development  ("urban  creep"),  dependent  on the 
housing  density , following  the Local  Authority  SuDS  Officer Organisation  (LASOO) 
Practice  Guidance  for the non-statutory  standards  for SuDS  or any replacement 
guidance. 
Improvements  to the Green  Infrastructure  and biodiversity  of the area. 
For all major  applications  the Council  requires  to see a detailed  Drainage  Strategy  that 
demonstrates  how the proposed  drainage  system  meets  the criteria  set out above  and how 
the proposed  drainage  system  will be managed  and maintained  for the lifetime  of the 
development. 
Reasoned  Justification 
14.18  This policy  should  be read in conjunction  with the Wyre Forest  Water Cycle  Study 
(2017,  and 2018  update).  All new development  will require  a suitably  designed  drainage  system 
in order  to mitigate  the risk of surface  water  and overland  flooding  both on and off the site. 
14.19  The Water Cycle  Study  provides  more  detail  on the implementation  of greywater 
recycling,  rainwater  harvesting  and SuDS.  Developers  should  allow  for sufficient  land for SuDS 
to be designed  in at the outset;  lack of space  is not considered  appropriate  justification  for not 
accommodating  SuDS.  A range  of SuDS  methods  are available,  although  some  will be more 
suited  to some  sites than others.  SuDS  selection  should  be specific  to a site and should  not be 
limited  to one technique  per site. Consideration  should  be given  to source  control  within  the 
surface  water  drainage  proposals,  which  can be achieved  through  a range  of techniques. 
14.20  There  will be a clear  presumption  in favour  of at surface  level,  multi-functional  and 
biodiversity-led  SuDS  and sites should  be assessed  on their merits  to determine  which  SuDS 
techniques  are the most  suitable  particularly  where  contaminated  land may be an issue.  It is 
considered  that all development  sites are able to incorporate  some  form of SuDS;  the scale  of 
these  techniques  should  be proportionate  to the scale  of development  proposed.  All surface 
water  run-of f should  be properly  treated  (see 14.13). 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 112 Water Management 14 14.21  New development  must  not create  adverse  pressures  on the water  environment  that 
could  compromise  the District’ s ability  to meet  the Water Framework  Directive  (WFD)  objectives. 
Development  is required  to conserve  and where  feasible  enhance  watercourses  and riverside 
habitats,  through  management  and mitigation  measures  for the improvement  and/or  enhancement 
of water  quality  and habitat  of any aquatic  environment  in or adjoining  the development  site. It 
is also important  for applicants  to bear in mind  the importance  of the River  Basin  Management 
Plan and the Worcestershire  Surface  Water Management  Plan when  putting  together  proposals. 
14.22  Like all drainage  systems,  SuDS  components  should  be inspected  and maintained. 
This ensures  efficient  operation  and prevents  failure.  The design  process  should  consider  the 
maintenance  of the components  and a SuDS  management  plan for the maintenance  of SuDS 
should  be prepared.  SuDS  components  that are on or near the surface  can often  be managed 
using  landscape  maintenance  techniques.  For below-ground  SuDS  such  as permeable  paving 
and modular  geocellular  storage  the manufacturer ’s maintenance  advice  should  be followed. 
14.23  Developments  should  make  allowance  for future  development  for example  the hard 
surfacing  of previously  green  areas  such  as gardens,  in the design  and capacity  of drainage 
systems.  Local  evidence  shows  that change  occurs  over time as residents  extend  their properties 
through  property  extensions,  tarmac  front gardens  for extra  parking  spaces,  use hard surfacing 
to reduce  maintenance  in gardens  as well as businesses  seeking  to provide  more  parking  for 
employees. 
Wyre Forest  District 
113 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 14 Water Management Policy  SP.33 - Pollution  and Land  Instability 
1. Development  proposals  must  be designed  in order  to avoid  any significant  adverse 
impacts  from pollution,  including  cumulative  ones,  on any of the following: 
Human  health  and wellbeing. 
Biodiversity . 
The water  environment. 
The effective  operation  of neighbouring  land uses. 
An existing  or proposed  Air Quality  Management  Area  (AQMA)  (19) 
2. Development  proposals  will not be permitted  where  the land is contaminated  (20) and 
not capable  of appropriate  remediation  without  compromising  development  viability  or 
the delivery  of sustainable  development.  For sites where  land contamination  is 
suspected,  an adequate  site investigation  survey  will need  to be prepared  (by a 
competent  person)  to demonstrate  that land contamination  issues  have  been  fully 
addressed  or can be addressed  through  the development. 
3. C. Development  proposals  will not be permitted  in locations  where  there  are risks from 
land instability . Development  proposals  within  areas  known  or suspected  to be at risk 
of slope  instability  or poor ground  conditions  will need  to demonstrate  the following: 
a. Its structural  integrity  will not be compromised  by slope  instability; 
b. The development  does  not exacerbate  any instability  on the site or elsewhere; 
c. The developent  can tolerate  ground  conditions  by special  design;  and 
d. There  is long term stability  of any structures  built on filled or mined  land. 
For sites suspected  of land instability , an adequate  site investigation  survey  will need  to be 
prepared  (by a competent  person)  to demonstrate  that land instability  issues  have  been 
fully addressed. 
Reasoned  Justification 
15.1 The NPPF(21) clearly  sets out, in broad  terms,  that pollution  and land instability  are 
material  planning  considerations. 
15.2 Pollution  can and does  have  detrimental  impacts  on the environment  and human  health. 
In the absence  of a robust  local plan policy , both the quality  of life of local residents  and the 
ecology  of the area would  be compromised. 
19 The countywide  Worcestershire  Air Quality  Action  Plan (September  2013)  includes  maps  of the AQMA  in the plan 
area and is available  at http://www .worcsregservices.gov .uk/media/486190/Final-AQAP-Whole-Doc-v23b-adopted.pdf 
20 As defined  under  Part IIA of the Environmental  Protection  Act 1990 
21 NPPF  Paragraphs  183, 184, 185, 186 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 114 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 15 15.3 Pollution  can take many  forms,  e.g. chemical,  dust,  light,  noise,  fumes,  smell,  vibration, 
all of which  can have  detrimental  impacts  on the environment  and the quality  of life. These 
potential  adverse  effects  must  be carefully  considered  in the assessment  of any planning 
application  and can be the basis  for the refusal  of a planning  application  if not adequately 
addressed.  Developers  are encouraged  to have  pre-application  discussions  with the Council 
to be advised  on the specific  requirements. 
15.4 Assessments  should: 
Identify  the sensitive  receptor(s)  which  may be affected  by the proposed  development, 
including  residents,  businesses,  land users  and sensitive  environmental  assets; 
Consider  the potential  for cumulative  impacts  with other  existing  or approved  development; 
Demonstrate  the measures  which  would  be implemented  to ensure  adverse  impacts  would 
be avoided  at source  or, where  this is not possible,  outline  the proposed  management  and 
mitigation  measures  to reduce  effects  to an acceptable  level;  and identify  the significance 
of any residual  effects. 
15.5 Developers  are expected  to proactively  monitor  impacts  and emissions  to enable  issues 
to be addressed  swiftly . Close  liaison  with communities  can support  this approach,  enabling 
feedback  and dialogue  on the need  for and effectiveness  of any mitigation  measures. 
15.6 The Wyre Forest  District  overlies  a principal  aquifer  of regional  strategic  importance  in 
terms  of water  supply  and there  are a number  of Source  Protection  Zones  (SPZs)  to protect 
public  water  resources.  For proposed  developments  that will have  an impact  on or are affected 
by groundwater , the Environment  Agency's  Groundwater  protection  position  statements  should 
be considered  to help provide  appropriate  control  measures,  especially  in areas  designated  as 
Source  Protection  Zone  1 (SPZ1). 
15.7 The term 'poor  ground  conditions'  referred  to in Policy  SP.33 may include,  but is not 
limited  to the  following: 
Poorly  consolidated  made  ground  and fill material; 
Soft, weak  and wet natural  soils; 
Areas  of shallow  mine-workings  and mineshafts;  or 
Colliery  spoil mounds. 
Minerals 
15.8 At present,  minerals  policy  and proposals  for the County  of Worcestershire  are set out 
in the policies  of the Minerals  Local  Plan (1997)  that were  "saved"  by the Secretary  of State  in 
September  2007.  These  "saved"  minerals  policies  will be replaced  by the revised  Worcestershire 
Minerals  Local  Plan upon  its adoption  (currently  anticipated  in sping  2021)  which  will form part 
of the overall  Development  Plan for Wyre Forest  District. 
15.9 Most  of the north-west  of Worcestershire  consists  of Old Red Sandstone.  Carboniferous 
strata  occur  in the western  parts  of Wyre Forest  Area  where  they form a western  continuation 
of the South  Staffordshire  Coalfield.  These  strata  contain  layers  of sandstone  and shales, 
ironstone  and coal deposits.  The NPPF  states  that permission  should  not be given  for the 
Wyre Forest  District 
115 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 15 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste extraction  of coal unless  the proposal  is environmentally  acceptable  or can be made  so by 
planning  conditions  or obligations  or it provides  national,  local or community  benefits  that clearly 
outweigh  the likely  impacts.  Any planning  application  for coal extraction  would  be determined 
by Worcestershire  County  Council  as the Mineral  Planning  Authority . 
15.10  The Permian  and Triassic  rocks  of the following  Upper  Palaeozoic  and Mesozoic  eras 
are generally  softer , comprising  sandstones  and marls  and make  up the greater  part of central 
Worcestershire,  including  the eastern  parts  of Wyre Forest.  Overlying  the ‘solid  geology’  are 
Quaternary  deposits  of ‘drift’  material.  These  include  till / boulder  clay deposited  directly  by 
glacial  ice as fluvio-glacial  deposits  which  can be found  particularly  along  the valleys  of the 
Rivers  Severn  and Stour . 
Policy  SP.34 - Minerals 
1. Developers  will be encouraged  to reuse  and recycle  construction  waste  on-site  and 
use substitute  or secondary  and recycled  minerals  within  development  to reduce  the 
use of primary  materials. 
2. Proposed  development  in Minerals  Consultation  Areas  will be required  (22) to assess 
the potential  for the proposed  development  to sterilise  locally  or nationally  important 
mineral  resources,  or impact  on the operation  of permitted  mineral  sites or supporting 
infrastructure.  Planning  permission  will not be granted  for non-mineral  development 
that would  lead to the unnecessary  sterilisation  of mineral  resources  or unacceptable 
impacts  on the operation  of permitted  mineral  sites or supporting  infrastructure  within 
a Minerals  Safeguarding  Area  (MSA)  unless: 
i. The applicant  can demonstrate  that the mineral  concerned  is no longer  of any 
value  or future  potential  value,  or the supporting  infrastructure  is no longer 
necessary  to facilitate  minerals  working;  or 
ii. The development  is of a temporary  nature  and can be completed  and the site 
restored  to a condition  that does  not inhibit  extraction  within  the timescale  that the 
mineral  is likely  to be needed;  or 
iii. Where  sterilisation  of a locally  or nationally  important  mineral  resource  could  occur , 
opportunities  for extraction  of the resource  will be optimised  prior to any non 
minerals  development  commencing;  or 
iv. Where  permitted  mineral  sites or supporting  infrastructure  could  be compromised, 
sufficient  mitigation  measures  will be put in place  to ensure  their continued 
operation. 
Reasoned  Justification 
15.11 The NPPF  indicates  that local planning  authorities  should  define  Mineral  Safeguarding 
Areas  and Mineral  Consultation  Areas   and should  take account  of the contribution  that substitute 
or secondary  and recycled  materials  can make  to the supply  of materials. 
22 Excluding  ‘exempt  development’,  as defined  in the Worcestershire  Minerals  Local  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 116 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 15 15.12  The broad  extent  of mineral  resources  that occur  in Wyre Forest  District  is shown  on 
the Worcestershire  County  Council  Emerging  Minerals  Local  Plan interactive  map.(23) 
15.13  Development  can "sterilise"  mineral  resources  (make  them  inaccessible  for potential 
extraction)  or prejudice  the operation  of mineral  sites and supporting  infrastructure.  This can 
be either  directly , for example  by building  over land that contains  minerals;  or indirectly , for 
example  through  the introduction  of sensitive  land uses  in close  proximity  to these  resources 
or sites. 
15.14  Minerals  Safeguarding  Areas  (MSAs)  are areas  designated  by the Minerals  Planning 
Authority  that cover  known  deposits  of minerals  that are desired  to be safeguarded  from 
unnecessary  sterilisation  by non-mineral  development.  MCAs,  based  on MSAs,  are where 
consultation  is required  with Worcestershire  County  Council  as the Minerals  Planning  Authority 
on development  proposals  that have  the potential  to sterilise  the minerals  interests  of the site. 
15.15  The  boundaries  of the existing  MSAs  are shown  in the currently  adopted  Herefordshire 
and Worcestershire  Minerals  Local  Plan(24) These  boundaries  may be changed  during  the 
preparation  of the Worcestershire  Minerals  Local  Plan. 
15.16  The Local  Planning  Authority  will consult  the County  Council  on any planning  application 
received  for non-minerals  development  which  falls within  the boundary  of a MSA.  Allocations 
where  mineral  resource  safeguarding  has been  highlighted  and those  potentially  affecting 
minerals  infrastructure  are listed  in paragraph  15.31  onwards.   
15.17  Proposals  which  are in MCA  should  take a sequential  approach  to considering  the 
following  possible  outcomes: 
1. Extracting  all of the resources  within  the proposed  development  site and in the area which 
would  potentially  be sterlised  by the development,  either  in advance  of development  taking 
place  or in phases  alongside  the development; 
2. Where  extracting  all of the resource  would  prevent  establishment  of a suitable  landform 
for subsequent  development,  consider  whether  a proportion  of the resource  could  be 
extracted;  or 
3. As a last resort  if neither  (1) nor (2) is possible,  consider  whether  any opportunities  exist 
for "incidental  recovery  of the mineral  resource." 
15.18  Permitted  minerals  sites and the supporting  infrastructure  of existing  potential  storage, 
handling  and transport  sites are important  to delivering  a steady  and adequate  supply  of mineral 
resources  in Worcestershire,  and it is therefore  important  that they are not adversely  impacted 
by insensitive  or inappropriate  development  that would  conflict  with the use of sites identified 
for these  purposes. 
15.19  Different  types  of development  may or may not conflict  with the use of the mineral  site 
or supporting  infrastructure.  The potential  for conflict  is a function  of both the sensitivity  of the 
land use or receptors  at the proposed  development  and the techniques  or processes  employed 
at the minerals  or infrastructure  site. Applicants  will need  to assess  whether  the normal  operation 
23 http://gis.worcestershire.gov .uk/W ebsite/MineralsLocalPlan/ 
24 http://www .worcestershire.gov .uk/info/20015/planning_policy_and_strategy/1009/adopted_minerals_local_plan 
Wyre Forest  District 
117 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 15 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste of the mineral  site or supporting  infrastructure  could  have  adverse  impacts  on the proposed 
land use or any users  of the proposed  development.  This should  include  consideration  of issues 
such  as (but not limited  to) any noise,  vibrations,  dust,  or fumes  that may result  from the normal 
operation  of the site, and could  lead to complaints  which  could  jeopardise  the continued  operation 
of the mineral  site or supporting  infrastructure.  Techniques  such  as considered  design,  site 
layout  and landscaping  or screening  of the proposal  may in some  cases  be adequate  to mitigate 
any impacts. 
15.20  The identification  of a MSA  does  not imply  that permission  for extraction  will be given, 
only that the presence  of minerals  is a material  consideration  that must  be addressed  when 
considering  future  development. 
Secondary  and Recycled  Aggregates 
15.21  To sustain  economic  growth  without  increasing  the use of land-won  aggregates,  it is 
vital that the contribution  of secondary  and recycled  materials  used  in construction  projects  is 
increased.  On site recycling  and reuse  of construction  materials  will therefore  be encouraged, 
having  regard  to the environmental  implications  of any proposed  operations  and their overall 
acceptability . The use of substitute  or secondary  and recycled  materials  in development  will 
also be encouraged. 
Legacy  of Minerals  Extraction 
15.22  Where  development  is proposed  in areas  with a known  legacy  of minerals  extraction, 
the developer  will be expected  to assess  the site for ground  contamination,  ground  stability  and 
mining  hazards  and submit  appropriate  mitigation  reports  in support  of their planning  application. 
Waste 
15.23  Planning  applications  relating  to the use of land (and buildings)  for the purposes  of 
waste  management  will be determined  by Worcestershire  County  Council.  The Waste Core 
Strategy , adopted  by the County  Council  in November  2012  and covering  the period  up to 2027, 
is complementary  to the Wyre Forest  Local  Plan and forms  part of the development  plan. 
Policy  SP.35 - Waste 
Proposals  for new development  should  incorporate  adequate  facilities  into the design  to 
allow  occupiers  to separate  and store  waste  for recycling  and recovery  unless  existing 
provision  is adequate.  Such  facilities  should  be well-designed. 
Reasoned  Justification 
15.24  National  Planning  Policy  for Waste (October  2014)  sets out national  waste  planning 
policies.  It should  be read in conjunction  with the NPPF , the Waste Management  Plan for 
England  and National  Policy  Statements  for Waste Water and Hazardous  Waste,  or any 
successor  documents. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 118 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 15 15.25  To minimise  waste  and pollution  and reduce  the impact  of waste  on Climate  Change, 
Wyre Forest  District  Council  expects  future  developments  to support  the waste  management 
hierarchy . The waste  hierarchy  gives  top priority  to preventing  waste  in the first place.  Where 
waste  is generated,  priority  is to reuse,  then recycle,  then other  forms  of recovery  such  as 
energy  recovery  and last of all disposal  (for example  landfill). 
15.26  To ensure  waste  is dealt  with at as high a level as possible  on the waste  hierarchy , 
and to protect  amenities  and prevent  pollution,  the waste  implications  of all new development 
must  be considered. 
15.27  To safeguard  existing  or permitted  waste  management  facilities  Wyre Forest  District 
Council  will consult  Worcestershire  County  Council  on any planning  applications  within  250m 
of such  a site, in accordance  with the Waste Core  Strategy . Maps  showing  existing  waste 
management  facilities  with a 250m  buffer are shown  on the Worcestershire  County  Council’ s 
website.  Allocations  affecting  these  facilities  are listed  in paragraph  16.30  onwards. 
15.28  The Waste Core  Strategy  requires  that on-site  facilities  for separating  or storing  waste 
should  be adequate  to meet  the needs  of occupiers  of any proposed  new development.  Such 
facilities  should  be well designed  so that they do not act as an eyesore. 
15.29  On smaller  sites,  provision  might  include  collection  points  for segregated  waste.  On 
larger  sites,  particularly  where  significant  areas  of new housing  or employment  land are proposed, 
waste  storage  facilities  will almost  always  be needed  and provision  might  also include  on-site 
treatment  facilities  such  as community  composting,  anaerobic  digestion  forming  part of a district 
heating  system  or, in the case  of industrial  operations,  the management  of specific  wastes 
produced  on site. 
15.30  Specifications  for the minimum  standards  for the type and scale  of facilities  and vehicular 
manoeuvrability  needed  for new residential,  commercial  and mixed-use  developments  will be 
informed  by the ADEPT  report  ‘Making  Space  for Waste’  (June  2010)(25) All applications  will 
be assessed  against  this guidance. 
Implications  for Worcestershire  Waste Core  Strategy  and Worcestershire  Minerals  Local 
Plan   
15.31  A number  of the site allocations  have  repercussions  for existing  waste  management 
facilities,  mineral  infrastructure  or mineral  resources.   
15.32  Policy  WCS  16: New Development  proposed  on or near to existing  waste  management 
facilities,  requires  a developer  to demonstrate  that as the ‘agent  of change’  (NPPF  paragraph 
187) the proposed  development  will not prevent,  hinder  or unreasonably  restrict  the operation 
of an existing  waste  management  site within  250m  and will include  any necessary  mitigation 
to ensure  that the operation  of the existing  business  will not have  an adverse  effect on the new 
development.  (Worcestershire  Waste Core  Strategy  2012-27) 
25 http://www .lgcplus.com/Journals/3/Files/2010/7/14/ADEPTMakingspaceforwaste_000.pdf . 
Wyre Forest  District 
119 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 15 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 15.33  Sites  potentially  affecting  existing  waste  management  facilities: 
Timber  Yard Park Lane  (Policy  SA.K5) 
Kidderminster  Fire Station  (Policy  SA.K7) 
Rock  Works Park Lane  (Policy  SA.K6) 
SDF site Stourport  Road  (Policy  SA.K19) 
Firs View Yard Wilden  Lane  (Policy  SA.S14) 
15.34   NPPF  paragraph  210e  requires  infrastructure  which  supports  mineral  development  to 
be safeguarded.  Developers  of the following  sites will need  to address  the mineral  sites and 
infrastructure  safeguarding  policy  requirements  of the Worcestershire  Minerals  Local  Plan to 
demonstrate  that as the ‘agent  of change’  (NPPF  paragraph  187) the proposed  development 
will include  any necessary  mitigation  to ensure  that the operation  of the existing  business  will 
not have  an adverse  effect on the new development. 
15.35  Site potentially  affecting  existing  minerals  infrastructure  (concrete  batching  plant): 
Kidderminster  Ambulance  Station  Stourport  Road  (Policy  SA.K12) 
SDF site Stourport  Road  (Policy  SA.K19) 
15.36  NPPF  paragraph  210 (c & d) requires  locally  and nationally  important  mineral  resources 
to be safeguarded  from sterilisation  by non-mineral  development  where  this should  be avoided. 
Developers  of the following  sites will need  to address  the mineral  resource  safeguarding  policy 
requirements  of the Worcestershire  Minerals  Local  Plan,  undertaking  a minerals  resource 
assessment  to inform  design  and to optimise  opportunities  for the partial  extraction  or incidental 
recovery  of the underlying  mineral  resource  either  in advance  of development  taking  place  or 
in phases  alongside  it.  
15.37  Sites  where  mineral  resource  safeguarding  has been  highlighted  through  the Duty to 
Cooperate: 
Land  at Low Habberley  (Policy  SA.K16)   
Adj. Easter  Park,  Worcester  Road  (Policy  SA.K20) 
Land  off Zortech  Avenue  (Policy  SA.K23)   
Lea Castle  (Policy  SP.LCV1) 
Land  at Husum  Way (SP.KEE1) 
Land  at Comberton  Road  (SP.KEE3) 
Pearl  Lane  (Policy  SA.S4) 
Land  North  of Wilden  Industrial  Estate  (Policy  SA.S15) 
Stourport  Road  Triangle  (Policy  SA.B2) 
Catchem's  End (Policy  SA.B3) 
Land  south  of Habberley  Road  (Policy  SA.B4) 
Land  at Caunsall  Road  (Policy  SA.R8) 
15.38  The need  for safeguarding  of minerals  resources  at the following  sites has been  ruled 
out through  the Duty to Cooperate  process  and exemptions  will be applied. 
Land  at Stourbridge  Road  (Policy  SA.K1 1) 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 120 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 15 Four Acres  Caravan  Park (Policy  SA.S1 1) 
School  site Coniston  Crescent  (Policy  SA.S13) 
Firs View Yard, Wilden  Lane  (Policy  SA.S14) 
Rock  Tavern  car park,  Caunsall  (Policy  SA.R7) 
Land  r/o Zortech  Avenue  (Policy  SA.K17) 
Land  west of former  school  site Coniston  Crescent  (Policy  SA.S6) 
Former  Burlish  Golf Course  Clubhouse  (Policy  SA.K22)   
Wyre Forest  District 
121 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 15 Pollution  Minerals  and Waste 16.1 For the Plan to facilitate  the viability  and success  of the Wyre Forest  economy  it must 
be sensitive  to the opportunities  posed  by new technology  whilst  at the same  time offering  some 
protection  from unnecessary  intrusion.  Two forms  of new technology  of particular  relevance 
and importance  to the planning  system  due to their infrastructure  implications  are 
Telecommunications/Broadband  and Renewable  Energy . The interpretation  of these  policies 
and any future  review  will need  to acknowledge  the fast-moving  nature  of these  technologies. 
16.2 Broadband  development  across  the whole  of Worcestershire  is driven  by the 
Worcestershire  Local  Broadband  Plan (WLBP),  as agreed  in May 2012.  The Plan aims  to drive 
economic  growth  across  the County  improving  speeds  for all residents  and local businesses. 
This will maximise  opportunities  for private  sector  investment,  thus reducing  the need  for public 
sector  funding.  These  priorities  are echoed  in the County  Council’ s Corporate  Plan for which 
“Open  for Business  “ is a priority  and broadband  is a key enabler . This is fully supported  by the 
business  community  and the Worcestershire  Local  Enterprise  Partnership  (LEP).    
Policy  SP.36 - Telecommunications  and Broadband 
Broadband  and Mobile  Infrastructure 
1. All new development  of 20 dwellings  or more  will be expected  to include  the provision 
of full fibre gigabit  capable  network  infrastructure  Fibre  to the Premises  (FTTP)  to 
enable  broadband  services  for all occupiers.  On sites below  20 dwellings  FTTP  should 
still be installed  where  the costs  are no more  than copper  line broadband  infrastructure. 
2. For all new development  the applicant  will be expected  to consult  with 
telecommunication  providers  to explore  the need  for other  telecommunications 
technology  incorporating  mobile  (including  5G), fixed wireless  (26) and Wi-Fi.  If additional 
technology  is required  space  should  be made  available  for the required  infrastructure 
within  the development;  When  considering  the development  of telecommunications 
technology  the following  factors  should  be taken  into consideration: 
a. Operational  requirements  of the telecommunication  networks  and the limitations 
of the technology , including  technical  constraints  on the location  of 
telecommunications  apparatus. 
b. The need  for International  Commission  on Non-Ionizing  Radiation  Protection 
(ICNIRP)  Guidelines  (and/or  any other  relevant  guidance  in place  at the time of 
the application)  for safe emissions  to be met. 
c. The need  to avoid  interference  with existing  electrical  equipment  and air traffic 
services. 
d. Development  should  also consider  the provision  of in-building  solutions  for 
broadband  and telecommunications  technology . 
e. The impact  of the development  on its surroundings. 
26 Fixed  wireless  is the operation  of wireless  communication  devices  or systems  used  to connect  two fixed  locations 
(e.g.,  building  to building  or tower  to building)  with a radio  or other  wireless  link, such  as laser  bridge.  Usually , fixed 
wireless  is part of a wireless  LAN infrastructure.  The purpose  of a fixed  wireless  link is to enable  data communications 
between  the two sites or buildings.  Fixed  wireless  data (FWD)  links are often  a cost-ef fective  alternative  to leasing 
fibre or installing  cables  between  the buildings. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 122 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy 16 Reference  should  also be made  to government  guidelines  on the rollout  of fixed  and mobile 
networks  at the local level.  (27) 
3. Within  all new developments  both residential  and commercial,  ducting  infrastructure 
should  be provided  to 120%  of the capacity  requirements  of the proposed  development 
to provide  for future  growth.    
Reference  should  also be made  to government  guidelines  on the rollout  of fixed  and mobile 
networks  at the local level (28)  
The siting  and appearance  of the proposed  apparatus  and associated  structures  should 
seek  to minimise  the impact  on the visual  amenity , character , landscape  and appearance 
of the surrounding  area,  particularly  if it affects  the setting  of Heritage  Assets.  All geospatial 
considerations  can be considered  through  Government  guidance  (29)  
If on a building,  apparatus  and associated  structures  should  be sited  and designed  in order 
to seek  to minimise  the impact  to the external  appearance.  When  choosing  a suitable 
location  for the apparatus  ongoing  access  at appropriate  and suitable  times  should  be 
considered. 
Reasoned  Justification 
16.3 The NPPF  recognises  the role of advanced,  high quality  communications  infrastructure 
in creating  sustainable  economic  growth  as part of strategic  policies.  The development  of high 
speed  broadband  technology  and other  communications  networks  will also play a vital role in 
enhancing  the provision  of local community  facilities  and services.  The Government’ s target  is 
that at least  85% of UK premises  will have  access  to gigabit-capable  broadband  by 2025.  The 
Government  states  it will “seek  to accelerate  roll-out  further  to get as close  to 100%  as possible”   
(30) 
16.4  Plans  exist to eventually  retire  the copper  network,  (31)with dates  suggested  as early 
as 2030  for this. The migration  away  from analogue  services  over the copper  network  is already 
underway . In 2015  BT announced  that they will be switching  off the Public  Switch  Telephone 
Network  (PSTN)  and Integrated  Services  Digital  Network  (ISDN)  by 2025.  (32) 
16.5 Some  infrastructure  providers  have  agreed  to provide  FTTP  infrastructure  to 
new developments  of 20 dwellings  or more  at no cost to the developer;  whilst  others  will provide 
and deliver  materials  at zero cost to the developer  e.g. Virgin Media.   
27 https://commonslibrary .parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp-8392 
28 https://www .ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0022/204853/consultation-copper-regulation-withdrawal-conditions.pdf 
29 https://digitalwholesalesolutions.com/2019/10/the-bt-openreach-pstn-and-isdn-2025-switch-of f/ 
30 https://commonslibrary .parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp-8392 
31 An Openreach  guide  for developers  is available  here,  including  rate cards  for residential  and urban  developments  under 
20 premises,  rebates  for self-install  and other  Frequently  Asked  Questions  Fibre  for developers  (openreach.com) 
32 https://www .icnirp.org/cms/upload/publications/ICNIRPemfgdl.pdf 
Wyre Forest  District 
123 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 16 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy 16.6 Openreach  (33)will install  FTTP  to all developments  of fewer  than 20 dwellings  where 
the cost is equal  or lower  than the installation  of copper .  
16.7  In some  exceptional  locations  outside  urban  areas,  an equivalent  alternative  solution 
may be acceptable  if developers  are unable  to facilitate  an FTTP  solution,  although  FTTP  is 
the preferred  option  and the burden  of proof  lies with the developer  as to why an alternative 
solution  is required.  In any case  developers  must,  as a minimum,  make  sure that broadband 
services  reach  ultrafast  speeds  (80mbps  +) and are made  available  to all premises,  at market 
prices  and with a choice  of UK service  providers.   
16.8 Communication  infrastructure  includes  telephone  systems  (both  wired  and mobile)  and 
broadband.  The benefits  of having  a modern  and accessible  system  of telecommunications, 
wireless  and electronic  methods  of communication  to Wyre Forest  District  will be significant. 
Increasingly  the demand  is for FTTP  broadband  using  fibre optic  technology  as defined  within 
the NPPF .  
16.9 Further  detail  on the provision  of high quality  telecommunications  and broadband  is also 
found  in the Wyre Forest  Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan.   
16.10  Broadband  development  across  the whole  of Worcestershire  is guided  by the 
Worcestershire  Local  Broadband  Plan (WLBP),  as agreed  in May 2012  and updated  in 2016. 
The WLBP  aims  to drive  economic  growth  across  the County  improving  broadband  speeds  for 
all residents  and local businesses.  This will maximise  opportunities  for private  sector  investment, 
thus reducing  the need  for public  sector  funding.  These  priorities  are echoed  in the County 
Council’ s Corporate  Plan for which  “Open  for Business"  is a priority  and broadband  is a key 
enabler . This is fully supported  by the business  community  and the Worcestershire  Local 
Enterprise  Partnership  (LEP).   
16.11 The additional  capacity  required  in part C of the policy  will allow  for future  proofing  e.g. 
additional  new builds  /redevelopment  and to support  digital  connectivity  for other  solutions. 
These  might  include  fibre connectivity  to mobile  or smart  community  applications  which  for 
example  could  provide  energy  efficient  lighting  or traffic management  solutions  for the 
development.   
16.12  A digitally  accessible  Wyre Forest  District  will allow  people  an enhanced  freedom  of 
choice  about  where  and how they work,  how they interact  with services  and facilities  and how 
they promote  and operate  their businesses.  A connected  community  is a more  sustainable  one, 
as it represents  the opportunity  for a reduction  in car-based  commuting  and a commensurate 
reduction  in carbon  outputs  and traffic congestion.  It also promotes  the idea of Wyre Forest  as 
a suitable  place  for high technology  activities  and employment  to take place. 
33 An Openreach  guide  for developers  is available  here,  including  rate cards  for residential  and urban  developments  under 
20 premises,  rebates  for self-install  and other  Frequently  Asked  Questions  Fibre  for developers  (openreach.com) 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 124 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy 16 16.13  Wyre Forest  District  Council  declared  a climate  emergency  in 2019.  A climate  emergency 
requires  prompt  action.  Climate  change  is caused  by the emission  of carbon  dioxide  and other 
greenhouse  gases  and has been  a consistent  trend  since  the Industrial  Revolution.  However , 
it has been  realised  that this is likely  to cause  catastrophic  and probably  irreversible  climate 
change. 
16.14  The types  and amounts  of fuel we use to generate  energy  determine  the amount  of 
carbon  emissions  released  into the atmosphere,  which  in turn impacts  on climate  change.  Heat 
and power  provision  from fossil  fuels  such  as coal and gas contribute  significantly  to our overall 
carbon  emissions.  This can be reduced  by generating  energy  from renewable  sources  through 
use of systems  such  as solar  panels  and air and ground  source  heating.  Whilst  clean  energy 
technology  and markets  continue  to develop,  new development  in the near term will still rely 
upon  fossil  fuel generated  heat and power  to some  extent.  Whatever  source  of fuel is used,  it 
is important  economically , as well as environmentally , to use energy  generated  as efficiently 
as possible. 
16.15  Our climate  is changing  and will continue  to do so for the foreseeable  future  due to 
carbon  emissions  already  emitted  and locked  into our climate  systems.  However , the more  that 
is done  to reduce  carbon  emissions,  the less extreme  the impacts  are likely  to be. 
Worcestershire’ s climate  has changed  over the last century , with changes  including  an increase 
in average  annual  temperature  and with winters  becoming  wetter  relative  to summers.  Predictions 
for our future  climate  include  increasing  temperatures  and changes  to precipitation  patterns 
and also an increase  in extreme  weather  events  such  as heatwaves  and flooding.  The potential 
impacts  of climate  change  are far reaching,  and it is vital that new development  considers  the 
impacts  and includes  measures  to adapt  accordingly . Climate  impacts  must  be considered  in 
development  of the built environment,  including  buildings,  roads,  drains  and utilities,  which  are 
designed  for the long-term  of 50 to 60 years  or even  longer . Structures  designed  now will need 
to cope  with the climate  of the 2070s  at least  and development  built to withstand  the likely 
impacts  of climate  change.  Due to the amount  of Carbon  Dioxide  (CO2) in the atmosphere  there 
will be some  degree  of climate  change,  however  the more  that we can do to reduce  emissions 
the less severe  the impact.   
16.16  Wyre Forest  District  Council’ s Corporate  Plan’ s (2019-2023)  includes  a ‘Safe,  Green 
and Clean  Living  Environment’  as one of its three  priorities.  It includes  a strategic  action  to work 
with partners  to protect  our environment,  to address  air quality  issues  and to help tackle  climate 
change.   
16.17  The NPPF  states  that “The planning  system  should  support  the transition  to a low 
carbon  future  in a changing  climate  .... and support  renewable  and low carbon  energy  and 
associated  infrastructure”.   
16.18  Wyre Forest  District  Council  recognises  that the climate  change  emergency  requires 
councils  to take positive  action.  For example,  the District  currently  has a very low level of 
provision  of charging  points  for electric  vehicles.  The Council  has resolved  to ensure  that 
adequate  electric  vehicle  charging  points  are provided  in Council-owned  public  car parks. 
Privately  owned  car parks  are encouraged  to do likewise  and electric  vehicle  charging  points 
Wyre Forest  District 
125 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 16 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy should  be provided  on all future  residential,  employment  and commercial  developments  where 
vehicle  access  is provided.  The Wyre Forest  Climate  Change  Action  Plan sets out actions  on 
energy  efficiency  and renewable  energy , reducing  single  use plastics  and tree planting. 
Policy  SP.37 - Renewable  and Low Carbon  Energy(34) 
General 
1. All new developments,  and where  possible  redevelopment  of existing  buildings,  should 
consider  location,  design,  siting  and orientation  to maximise  the use of natural  heat 
and light and the potential  for renewable  energy  micro-generation.  Where  possible,  in 
appropriate  locations,  solar  panels  should  be fitted.  All new residential,  employment 
or commercial  developments  should  include  electric  vehicle  charging  points. 
Incorporating  Renewable  and Low Carbon  Energy  into New Developmen t 
2. To reduce  carbon  emissions  and secure  sustainable  energy  solutions,  all new 
developments  over 100 square  metres  gross,  or one or more  dwellings,  should 
incorporate  the energy  from renewable  or low carbon  sources  equivalent  to at least 
10% of predicted  energy  requirements,  unless  it has been  demonstrated  that this would 
make  development  unviable.  Applications  will be required  to include  an Energy 
Assessment  demonstrating  how these  requirements  will be met. New developments 
should  be built to the highest  standards  of energy  efficiency , subject  to the Government's 
policy  for national  technical  standards  and the viability  of the development. 
3. New large  scale(35) development  should  install  a decentralised  energy  and heating 
network  if it is feasible  and viable  to do so as part of the development.  If a district  heat 
network  already  exists  new development  should  connect  to this network  unless 
satisfactory  evidence  is provided  to demonstrate  that this is not viable  or feasible. 
4. Renewable  energy  installations  that would  harm  the significance  of heritage  assets  or 
have  a detrimental  impact  on the landscape  or historic  environment,  conflicting  with 
any other  policies  contained  in this Plan will not be supported  unless  the requirements 
of the NPPF  are satisfied. 
Stand  Alone  Renewable  and Low Carbon  Energy  Schemes 
5. With the exception  of wind turbines  (see below),  proposals  for stand-alone  renewable 
and other  low carbon  energy  schemes  are welcomed  and will be considered  favourably 
having  regard  to the provisions  of other  relevant  policies  in the Plan,  providing  that 
appropriate  consultation  has taken  place  with the local community  and the appropriate 
Town or Parish  Council.  Where  possible,  community  shares  in renewable  energy 
schemes  which  offer members  of the community  investment  into local energy  schemes 
34 This policy  should  be considered  within  the context  of an “energy  hierarchy”,  whereby  energy  demand  is reduced 
through  energy  efficiency  and low energy  design  before  meeting  residual  energy  demand,   first from renewable  or low 
carbon  sources  and then from fossil  fuels. 
35 For the purposes  of this policy  only, the definition  of large  scale  development  is residential  developments  of 100 or 
more  dwellings  or non-residential  developments  of more  than 10,000  square  metres. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 126 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy 16 should  be considered.  No areas  within  Wyre Forest  District  have  been  identified  as 
suitable  for wind turbines.  This is due to constraints  such  as wind speeds,  access, 
topography  and land classification. 
Reasoned  Justification 
16.19  The Council  supports  the transition  to a low carbon  future  in a changing  climate.  It 
supports  ways  that contribute  to radical  reductions  in greenhouse  gas emissions,  re-use  of 
existing  resources,  low carbon  energy  and associated  infrastructure  in conformity  with the NPPF . 
16.20  Energy  infrastructure  is also referred  to in the Wyre Forest  Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan 
(IDP). 
16.21  The EU’s Renewable  Energy  Directive  sets an overall  target  for 20% of the energy 
consumed  in the European  Union  to come  from renewable  sources  by 2020,  with a UK target 
of 15% by 2020. 
16.22   In December  2018  the directive  (36)was revised  in which  it established  a new binding 
renewable  energy  target  for the EU for 2030  of at least  32%.  This figure  may be revised  upwards 
by 2023.   
16.23  National  government  policy  is to end the sale of new conventional  petrol  and diesel 
cars and vans  by 2030.  This Local  Plan runs to 2036,  therefore  the Council  needs  to ensure 
that residents,  workers  and visitors  to the District  have  access  to vehicle  charging  points  as 
they move  to alternative  fuelled  vehicles  such  as hybrid,  plug in electric  or other  fuels  such  as 
hydrogen.  Year on year the number  of electric  vehicle  registrations  are increasing.  Between 
July 2017  and July 2018  there  was an increase  in plug in electric  cars of 35%.  In November 
2019  more  than 1 in 10 new vehicles  on the road were  alternatively  fuelled  vehicles  either  hybrid, 
plug in hybrid  (PHEV)  or pure electric  or mild hybrid  electric.  At the end of September  2020 
pure electric  vehicles  accounted  for 6.7%  of new car registrations,  however , when  PHEV’ s are 
added  the figure  rises  to 10.5%  (Data  from the Society  of Motor  Manufactures  and Traders 
(SMMT)). 
16.24  The Climate  Change  Act 2008  (2050  Target  Amendment)  Order  2019  sets out how 
the UK will tackle  and respond  to climate  change.  The Act sets a legal  requirement  for the UK 
to be zero carbon  by 2050,  with a series  of five year carbon  budgets,  including  a 37% cut by 
2020  and 51% by 2025.  In 2018  the UK was 44% below  1990  levels;  this means  that both the 
first and second  carbon  budgets  were  met. At the present  time the third budget  is likely  to be 
met but the UK is not on track  to meet  the fourth  budget  (2023  to 2027).  The UK government 
also ratified  the Paris  Agreement  on Climate  Change  in November  2016.  The Paris  Agreement 
provides  a framework  for governments  as well as business  and investors  to keep  global  warming 
well below  2°C, pursuing  efforts to limit the temperature  increase  to 1.5°C.  In October  2018  a 
report  by the Intergovernmental  panel  on Climate  Change  (IPCC)  which  is the UN body  for 
assessing  the science  related  to climate  change.  The report  highlighted  the differing  impacts 
36 European  Commission  renewable  energy  directive  (2009/28/EC)  and directive  2018/2001/EU 
Wyre Forest  District 
127 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 16 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy between  limiting  global  warming  to 1.5%  compared  with 2%. If limited  to 1.5%  the likelihood  of 
an Arctic  Ocean  free of sea ice in summer  would  be once  per century  and coral  reefs  would 
decline  by 70 to 90 percent.  If the rise was by 2% the likelihood  of an Arctic  Ocean  free of sea 
ice in summer  would  be at least  once  per decade  and coral  reefs  would  virtually  all be lost.  The 
Government’ s Clean  Growth  Strategy  sets out a comprehensive  set of policies  and proposals 
that aim to accelerate  the pace  of “clean  growth”,  i.e. deliver  increased  economic  growth  and 
decreased  emissions.  Clean  growth  means  growing  our national  income  while  cutting  greenhouse 
gas emissions.  Since  1990,  UK emissions  have  fallen  whilst  the economy  has grown.  In order 
to meet  future  carbon  budgets,  government  recognises  the need  to drive  a significant  acceleration 
in the pace  of decarbonisation. 
16.25  The Government  has pledged  to introduce  a Future  Homes  Standard  which  will require 
new build homes  to be future-proofed  with low carbon  heating  and world-leading  levels  of energy 
efficiency;  it will be introduced  by 2025.  The Building  Regulations  are to be updated  in order  to 
implement  this, along  with interim  increases  in energy  efficiency  requirements.  New requirements 
for the inclusion  of electric  charging  points  in new residential  and commercial  developments 
are also due to be introduced  through  the Building  Regulations. 
16.26  The Worcestershire  Local  Enterprise  Partnership's  (LEP)  Strategic  Economic  Plan 
recognises  'agri-tech'  (including  green  energy)  as one of the county's  three  growth  sectors. 
Among  Worcestershire's  key infrastructure  issues  that need  to be addressed,  it identifies  an 
over-reliance  on energy  supplies  from outside  the county  and an over-reliance  on energy  from 
non-sustainable  sources.   The Worcestershire  Local  Enterprise  Partnership’ s Energy  Strategy 
2019-2030  aims  to reduce  carbon  emissions  by 50% from 2005  levels  by 2030,  to double  the 
size of the low carbon  sector  by 2030  and triple  energy  production  from renewable  generation 
by 2030.  The strategy  has been  produced  to help identify  the opportunities  and challenges  that 
Worcestershire  faces  in its movement  towards  a low-carbon,  low emission  economy  and sets 
out an overarching  energy  vision  for Worcestershire.   
16.27  Worcestershire  County  Council’ s ‘Assessment  of the capacity  for large-scale  renewable 
energy  in Worcestershire’  was commissioned  in 2008  to determine  the potential  capacity  for 
larger-scale  renewable  energy  generation  in Worcestershire.  It was concluded  that a suggested 
realistic  target  of 3.5%  of energy  consumption  from renewables  could  be achieved  by 2026 
across  Worcestershire.  This relates  only to large  scale  biomass,  wind and hydro  power  schemes 
and excludes  micro  generation  schemes,  such  as solar . 
16.28  Heat  networks  (district  heating  schemes)  supply  heat from a central  source  directly  to 
homes  and businesses  through  a network  of pipes,  so that individual  homes  and business  do 
not need  to generate  their own heat on site, helping  to reduce  carbon  emissions  through  energy 
efficiency . The UK government  has ambitious  plans  for heat networks  in the UK. Initial  results 
from modelling  by the Department  for Business  Energy  and Industrial  Strategy  indicated  that 
up to 20% of UK domestic  heat demand  might  be served  by heat networks  by 2030.  Government 
set up a Heat  Network  Delivery  Unit (HNDU)  to assist  local authorities  address  capacity  and 
capability  challenges  identified  as barriers  to heat network  deployment  in the UK. The 
Worcestershire  LEP obtained  HNDU  funding  and commissioned  a heat demand  mapping  and 
energy  master-planning  study . Two potential  district  heat networks  were  identified  in the 
Kidderminster  area;  the viability  of these  could  be significantly  improved  by the inclusion  of 
future  and planned  developments. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 128 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy 16 16.29  To be considered  acceptable  it is necessary  for proposals  for stand-alone  wind turbines 
to demonstrate  local support  either  through  a Neighbourhood  Plan or through  other  methods 
to secure  local backing. 
Wyre Forest  District 
129 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 16 Telecommunications  and Renewable  Energy Key Diagram 
To Bridgnorth
To WorcesterTo Birmingham
Lorem ipsumKidderminster 
Strategic Town 
Market Towns 
Villages 
(Not in Green Belt)
Rural 
SeƩlements 
Outlying 
SeƩlements
Major Roads
Motorway - M5
Commercial 
Railway 
Railway Sta Ɵons
Severn Valley 
Railway 
Main Rivers
Flood Zone 2 
Flood Zone 3 
Staﬀordshire and 
Worcestershire 
Canal 
The Wyre Forest 
District Green 
Belt 
Countryside 
(Outside Green Belt)
Strategic Centre 
Stourport Road
Employment 
Corridor - S.R.E.C
West Midland 
Safari & Leisure Park
Stour Valley 
Country Park
Burlish Country
ParkKEY
District  Boundary
(C) Crown Copyright. All Rights Reserved. 100018317. 2022Reserved Housing
Sites (RHS)
Lorem ipsumA456A442
A449
A451A456
A450A448A451A449A442HagleyStourbridge
Ha
To BromsgroveKinverAlveley
Highley
HartleburyChaddesley 
CorbeƩBlakedown
RockBliss Gate
Clows 
TopFar
ForestWolverley
Cookley
Fairﬁeld
WildenUpper 
Arley
Callow HillBelbroughton
M5KIDDERMINSTER
BEWDLEY
STOURPORT
-ON-SEVERN
Wyre Forest District Local Plan (2016-2036 ) Key Diagram Sites allocated for 
development
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 130 Key Diagram 17.1 This section  sets out the Council's  planning  policies  for managing  development  and 
growth  in the District  from 2016  until 2036.  It will be used  to guide,  assess  and determine 
planning  applications.  The Council’ s aim is to produce  a comprehensive  planning  framework 
to ensure  that the District’ s housing,  employment,  infrastructure  and other  needs  are met over 
the Plan Period  in a way that contributes  to achieving  sustainable  development.  Following  on 
from the strategic  framework,  it will set out the development  allocations  and detailed  policies 
for managing  new development. 
17.2 The plan and policies  in this section  should  be read alongside  the strategic  policies  set 
out in Part A of this Local  Plan and any Wyre Forest  District  Council  Supplementary  Planning 
Documents  (SPDs).  The Council  will produce  SPDs  where  it considers  them  necessary  to 
provide  more  details  on the policies  set out within  other  parts  of the Local  Plan.  SPDs  are not 
part of the statutory  development  plan and do not have  the same  weight;  however , they will be 
significant  considerations  in determining  planning  applications. 
17.3 The primary  objective  of development  management  is to enable  the delivery  of sustainable 
development.  Development  management  is not intended  to hinder  or prevent  sustainable 
development.  The Council  sees development  management  as a positive  and proactive  approach 
to shaping,  considering,  determining  and delivering  development  proposals. 
17.4 In combination  with each  other , the development  management  and site allocations 
policies  set out the specific  development  intentions  of Wyre Forest  District  Council  for the Plan 
Period  2016-2036  as follows: 
Development  Management  Policies:  Detailed  planning  policies  which  will be used  by the 
council  when  assessing  planning  applications. 
Site Allocations:  Sites  allocated  for development  for particular  land uses,  for example 
housing,  employment  and mixed  uses.  This is to provide  clarity  to the community  and 
developers  regarding  land uses  that, in principle,  are acceptable  to the council  on specific 
sites. 
17.5 These  sections  of the Local  Plan include  additional  policies  where  it is considered  that 
further  detail  is required  to aid the interpretation  of the strategic  policies  and to provide  a proper 
basis  for local development  management. 
17.6 Government  guidance  makes  it clear  that a Local  Plan should  not repeat  policies  that 
are in either  National  Policy  or other  ‘development  plan’  documents.  The absence  of a policy 
for a particular  topic  in the Local  Plan therefore  does  not necessarily  mean  that the topic  is 
unimportant;  it may be that there  is already  a relevant  adopted  policy  and must  therefore  be 
read in conjunction  with the other  relevant  plans  and guidance. 
Wyre Forest  District 
131 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 17 Development  Management  Introduction 18.1 The following  chapter  includes  the Development  Management  Policies  that will be used 
to determine  residential  planning  applications.  These  provide  more  detailed  criteria  for decision 
makers  and should  be considered  within  the overall  strategic  context  of chapter  7 – A Desirable 
Place  to Live. 
Viability  of Affordable  Housing  Requirements 
18.2 This policy  provides  the framework  against  which  negotiation  over the proportion  and 
type of affordable  housing  on individual  sites will be considered  to take account  of specific 
viability  issues. 
Policy  DM.1  - Financial  Viability 
All the allocated  sites within  the Local  Plan have  been  assessed  using  the typology 
methodology  set out in Paragraph  004 of the Planning  Practice  Guidance.  Where  applications 
depart  from the assumptions  made  in the Local  Plan Viability  Assessment,  May 2017 
(IFT07),  the Local  Plan Viability  Assessment  Update,  October  2018  (IFT06)  and the 
Pre-Submissions  Viability  Note  (IFTO5), the applicant  will be expected  to justify  the need 
for a viability  assessment. 
a.  If it is agreed  that a viability  assessment  is required  then it is for the applicant  to 
demonstrate  how the assumptions  made  in the Plan assessments  have  changed.  Any 
evidence  to substantiate  any claims  should  also be provided.  Details  of acceptable 
evidence  can be found  in the Supplementary  Planning  Document  on Planning 
Obligations. 
b. Where  the District  Council  considers  it necessary  to obtain  independent  advice  to 
validate  a viability  assessment  which  has been  submitted,  the applicant  will be required 
to meet  all reasonable  costs  of doing  so.  
c. For transparency , in accordance  with the Planning  Practice  Guidance,  any viability 
assessment  should  be prepared  on the basis  that it will be made  publicly  available 
other  than in exceptional  circumstances.  In addition,  an executive  summary  should  be 
prepared  in accordance  with the government’ s data format.   
Reasoned  Justification 
18.3 Where  an applicant  considers  that there  are significant  cost constraints  affecting  a 
development  site and that these  are sufficient  to impede  the developer  meeting  the Council’ s 
affordable  housing  policy  expectations  of 25% on residential  or other  planning  obligations  and 
requirements  on development  sites,  they will be expected  to demonstrate  that the viability  of 
the proposals  would  be jeopardised  by this level of provision. 
18.4 The applicant  will be required  to provide  financial  information  in the form of a full viability 
assessment  carried  out by a suitably  qualified  person  to enable  the Council  to assess  the nature, 
extent  and impact  of the constraints  and the level of affordable  housing  that could  be provided. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 132 A Desirable  Place  to Live 18 18.5 It is recommended  that the methodology , underlying  assumptions  and any software 
used  to undertake  the appraisal  should  be agreed  with the Council  during  pre-application 
discussions.  This will ensure  that the viability  assessment  includes  the level of detail  required 
by the Council. 
18.6 Where  the Council  needs  to seek  independent  advice  to validate  a viability  assessment 
submitted  by an applicant,  then it will require  all reasonable  costs  of the independent  advice  to 
be met by the developer .  
18.7 The viability  assessment  should  be presented  on a residual  land value  or profit  basis, 
which  takes  into account  various  inputs,  including  projected  sales  revenues  and values  (including 
affordable  housing  revenue)  to establish  a Gross  Development  Value (GDV)  from which  Gross 
Development  Costs  (GDC)  are deducted.  GDC  either  includes  i) a site value  as a fixed  input 
cost resulting  in a developer ’s return  or profit  becoming  the residual  figure  which  is then compared 
to a benchmark  profit  level to assess  viability , or ii) a developer ’s return  is adopted  as an input 
cost giving  a residual  site value  which  reflects  the land value  that a developer  would  pay for the 
site. The residual  land value  should  then be compared  to the benchmark  market  value  of the 
site. 
Policy  DM.2-  Residential  Infill Development 
Infill development  is defined  as residential  development  of up to 6 dwellings  in an otherwise 
built up frontage. 
Residential  developments  on infill plots  within  the settlement  boundaries  of the three  main 
towns  and the villages  and other  rural settlements  will be encouraged  provided  that they 
contribute  to the existing  character  of the area in terms  of design,  density  and layout. 
a. Proposals  for infill development  within  villages  and other  rural settlements  should  be 
to meet  local needs  only as determined  by parish  needs  surveys  and/or  the housing 
register  as set out under  Policy  SP.2. 
b. Proposals  should  not be inappropriate  development  in the Green  Belt. 
c. Proposals  that would  lead to the over development  of a site will be resisted. 
d. The design,  scale  and layout  of the proposed  development  should  take account  of 
existing  dwellings  to ensure  that there  are no adverse  impacts  associated  with 
overlooking  and disturbance  to neighbouring  properties. 
e. All new proposals  for infill development  should  take account  of the design  principles 
as set out in the District  Council's  adopted  Design  Supplementary  Planning  Document 
and the Government's  Nationally  Described  Space  Standards. 
f. Applicants  will be required  to demonstrate  that proposals  include  adequate  car parking 
space  unless  the character  and local distinctiveness  of the area dictates  otherwise. 
Proposals  should  not have  an adverse  impact  on existing  road safety  or cause  amenity 
and parking  issues  for existing  residents. 
g. Infill development  proposals  located  within  a Conservation  Area  or adjacent  to heritage 
assets  will need  to be in keeping  and not harm  the form,  character  and setting  of the 
Conservation  Area  or heritage  assets.  They  also must  demonstrate  accordance  with 
Wyre Forest  District 
133 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 18 A Desirable  Place  to Live Historic  Environment  Policies  SP.21 and DM.23  and Policy  DM.24  Quality  Design  and 
Local  Distinctiveness. 
Reasoned  Justification 
18.8 Residential  developments  (up to 6 dwellings)  on infill plots  within  the settlement 
boundaries  of the three  main  towns  and the villages  are likely  to contribute  towards  new housing 
provision  in the District.  Whilst  such developments  are generally  to be encouraged,  it is important 
that they are well designed  to protect  and enhance  the existing  character  and amenity  of the 
residential  areas.  It is important  that such  plots  that become  available  in the rural areas  are 
developed  to meet  local housing  need  as demonstrated  through  a Parish  Housing  Needs  Survey 
and/or  the Housing  Register . This will ensure  the long-term  viability  and vitality  of these 
settlements. 
18.9 The Council  will assess  the effect that proposed  residential  infill developments  will have 
on the amount  of daylight  and overshadowing  neighbouring  properties  receive.  Proposals  that 
are likely  to have  an adverse  impact  and do not take account  of  design  guidance  will not be 
permitted. 
Policy  DM.3  - Flat Conversions 
Proposals  for the conversion  or sub-division  of existing  buildings  into flats will be considered 
having  regard  to the intensity  of the proposed  use and the accessibility  of the location  to 
shops  and other  services. 
Proposals  will be supported  provided  that: 
a. Conversion  is not detrimental  to the appearance  of the building  and the building  and 
plots  are of a suitable  and adequate  size for conversion. 
b. Appropriate  provision  is made  for car and cycle  parking,  private  amenity  space  and 
refuse  storage. 
c. The proposal  will not be detrimental  to the character  of the area. 
d. The internal  layout  minimises  noise  disturbance  and overlooking  to neighbours. 
e. It can be demonstrated  that development  and the site location  provides  appropriate 
opportunities  to promote  sustainable  transport  modes. 
Reasoned  Justification 
18.10  The District  has a number  of larger  properties  for which  the original  use may no longer 
be viable.  Sub-dividing  such  buildings  into smaller  residential  units  can secure  the future  of 
such  buildings;  however  it needs  careful  consideration  to ensure  that proposals  safeguard  the 
character  of the area.  This policy  serves  to ensure  that any such  development  does  not have 
a detrimental  impact  on the character  of the area and the quality  of life of existing  residents. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 134 A Desirable  Place  to Live 18 18.11 The sub-division  of existing  dwellings  can be a suitable  means  of providing  smaller 
accommodation.  Where  the existing  dwelling  is important  to the character  of the area,  conversion 
into flats can secure  the future  of the building. 
18.12  The intensification  of the use of the building  can lead to detrimental  impacts  for 
neighbouring  properties  including  increased  levels  of noise  and issues  associated  with an 
increased  number  of vehicles  at the property . Adequate  parking  provision  should  generally  be 
made  within  the curtilage  of the dwelling.  However , in town  centres,  parking  requirements  may 
be relaxed  where  this is not possible  or desirable. 
Policy  DM.4  - Residential  Caravans,  Mobile  Homes  and Houseboat  Moorings 
The use of caravans  and mobile  homes  for residential  purposes  will only be permitted  for 
temporary  periods  to meet  specific  short  term needs  as follows: 
a. To temporarily  re-house  households  during  redevelopment  or major  refurbishment  to 
existing  housing  schemes. 
b. To provide  temporary  accommodation  for workers,  but not their families,  during  the 
construction,  major  alteration  or repair  of a dwelling,  provided  that the mobile  home 
can be satisfactorily  sited  within  the curtilage  of the dwelling. 
c. To meet  a temporary  or seasonal  agricultural  or forestry  need. 
d. To provide  temporary  accommodation  for a carer , where  it is fully justified  and supported 
by an appropriate  medical  practitioner , provided  that the mobile  home  can be 
satisfactorily  sited within  the curtilage  of the dwelling.  The time period  for any temporary 
permission  will need  to be included  as part of the justification  with a maximum  period 
of two years  being  considered  suitable  at any one time.   
The exception  to this is if a Gypsy  or Traveller  household  can demonstrate  a cultural  need 
for the siting  of a residential  caravan  or mobile  home  on an existing  caravan/mobile  home 
site.  
Reasoned  Justification 
18.13  Caravans  and mobile  homes  are not considered  to be appropriate  to meet  long term 
permanent  housing  needs  due to their limited  size and design.  The use of residential  mobile 
homes  will therefore  be restricted  to occasions  when  they may be required  to meet  a temporary 
need,  for example,  during  construction  or major  alterations/repairs  to a dwelling  or group  of 
properties,  in instances  relating  to the needs  of agriculture  and forestry , or in the case  of a carer , 
which  will be temporary  either  due to the nature  of the disability  or illness  of the cared-for  person, 
or because  the carer  is currently  looking  for more  permanent  accommodation. 
18.14  The Wyre Forest  District  Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  (2020) 
established  a need  for 35 pitches  to be provided  in the period  2020-2036.  In order  to meet  this 
requirement,  flexibility  has been  built into the policy  to allow  permanent  residence  of caravans 
and mobile  homes  on existing  parks. 
Wyre Forest  District 
135 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 18 A Desirable  Place  to Live 18.15  The Wyre Forest  District  Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  (2020)  also 
identified  that there  may be a need  for residential  boat moorings  in the district.  However , there 
is currently  insuf ficient  evidence  on this matter . If further  evidence  shows  that there  is a need 
for any type of new moorings,  the Council  will work  with the Canal  and River  Trust to bring 
forward  a suitable  moorings  policy  in the review  of the Plan.  This will establish  whether  any 
allocation  for moorings  may need  to be made  in the review  of the Local  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 136 A Desirable  Place  to Live 18 Site Standards  for Gypsies,  Travellers  and Travelling  Showpeople 
19.1 This policy  sets out specific  requirements  in relation  to the design  of sites for Gypsies, 
Travellers  and Travelling  Showpeople  which  are consistent  with Policies  SP.14 (Gypsy  and 
Traveller  Site Provision)  and SP.15 (Site Provision  for Travelling  Showpeople). 
Policy  DM.5  - Site Standards  for Gypsies,  Travellers  and Travelling  Showpeople 
Proposals  for Gypsy , Traveller  and Travelling  Showpeople  sites will only be granted  planning 
permission  where: 
a. Pitch  boundaries  are clearly  demarcated  using  an appropriate  boundary  treatment  and 
landscaping  which  is sensitive  to the local context.  There  should  be a clear  delineation 
between  public  and private  areas  and between  residential  and non-residential  areas. 
b. The site layout  gives  adequate  consideration  to pedestrian  safety , cycle  movements 
and vehicle  movements  and provides  adequate  space  for vehicles,  towing  caravans 
to enter , exit and manoeuvre  around  the site and for refuse  collections. 
c. All necessary  utilities  can be provided  on the site including  mains  water , electricity 
supply , surface  water  and foul water  drainage,  sanitation  and provision  for the screened 
storage  and collection  of waste  including  recycling. 
d. Sites  of 5 or more  pitches  should  include  a communal  recreation  area for children 
where  suitable  provision  is not available  within  walking  distance.  Play areas  should  be 
designed  in consultation  with the site manager  and residents  and should  meet  local 
authority  standards. 
Reasoned  Justification 
19.2 Gypsy  and traveller  sites should  be well-designed  and provide  adequate  amenity  and 
safety  levels  for residents,  including  the provision  of communal  facilities  and sufficient  space 
for safe vehicle  movements,  including  for refuse  collections. 
19.3 Private  gypsy  and traveller  sites will need  to apply  for a licence  and will be required  to 
meet  conditions  which  are based  on the national  model  standards  and relevant  to the site in 
question.  The site licence  conditions  are applied  to protect  the amenity  and safety  of the residents 
of the site. These  licence  conditions  will cover  issues  including  around  the provision  of facilities, 
layout  of sites,  spacing  out of pitches  and safety  requirements. 
19.4 The Good  Practice  Guide  on Designing  Gypsy  and Traveller  Sites  (published  by DCLG 
in 2008  and cancelled  in 2015)  suggested  that, where  possible,  sites should  be developed  near 
to housing  for the settled  community  as part of mainstream  residential  developments.  Planning 
Policy  for Traveller  Sites  also says that new Traveller  site development  in open  countryside  that 
is away  from existing  settlements  should  be very strictly  limited  and that any sites in rural areas 
should  respect  the scale  of, and not dominate  the nearest  settled  community . The guidance 
also states  the sites should  have  access  to water , electricity , drainage  and sanitation. 
Wyre Forest  District 
137 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 19 Providing  Accommodation  for Gypsies,  Travellers  and Travelling 
Showpeople 20.1 Access  to community  facilities  and the provision  of such  new facilities  to complement 
new development  is important  in determining  the acceptability  and attractiveness  of a location 
to live and work  and can be an important  factor  in the encouragement  of a healthy  lifestyle  (see 
also Policy  SP.16). 
Policy  DM.6  - Community  Facilities 
1.  Proposals  for new community  facilities  or the enhancement  of existing  facilities  which 
offer an increased  overall  provision  will be supported: 
a. where  they are demonstrated  to meet  an identified  local need   
b. in accessible  locations  that serve  a wide community   
c. where  they promote  the opportunities  to travel  by sustainable  modes,  and  
d. subject  to not conflicting  with any other  policies  contained  in the Plan. 
2. If new facilities  are proposed,  existing  facilities  in the area need  to be assessed  to 
determine  whether  rationalising  or combining  facilities  would  be more  appropriate  in 
the first instance.   
3. Where  existing  facilities  could  have  a significant  adverse  effect on proposed  new 
development  in its vicinity , the applicant  will be required  to provide  suitable  mitigation 
before  the development  has been  completed.   
4. Applicants  proposing  to re-develop  or convert  a community  facility  should  demonstrate 
that they have  carried  out an appropriate  consultation  with the community  most  likely 
to use the facility  prior to the submission  of a planning  application. 
5. Heritage  assets  can have  a positive  impact  on their location  and communities.  The 
use of under  used  heritage  assets  to provide  community  facilities  as a benefit  to the 
community  and the historic  environment  will be supported. 
6. Proposals  for sites that have  existing  community , natural  or historic  points  of interest 
within  the site boundary  should  seek  to enhance  these  assets  within  the development. 
7. Any proposal  that would  result  in the loss of land or buildings  currently  or formerly  used 
as a community  facility  will only be permitted  if: 
a. It has been  demonstrated  that there  is a surplus  of similar  provision  in the 
appropriate  catchment  area for that particular  facility  and the land or building(s) 
are not needed  for any other  community  facility;  or 
b. The community  facility , lost as a result  of the proposed  development,  would  be 
replaced  by equivalent  or better  provision  in terms  of quantity  and quality  in a 
suitable  location;  or 
c. The development  is for alternative  community  facilities  to meet  local needs  and, 
in the case  of the loss of sports  and recreational  facilities,  the benefits  of which 
clearly  outweigh  the loss; or 
d. In the case  of community  facilities  other  than sports  and recreational  facilities,  it 
has been  demonstrated  that it would  not be economically  or operationally  viable 
to retain  the facility  for community  use and the community  facility  could  not be 
provided  or operated  by either  the current  occupier  or by an alternative  occupier 
(e.g. by a local community  body , public-private  partnership  etc) and it has been 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 138 Community  Facilities 20 actively  marketed  for at least  12 months.  It must  be demonstrated  where  and how 
the marketing  has taken  place  and that it is has been  marketed  through  a suitably 
qualified  agent  and at an appropriate  value. 
Reasoned  Justification 
20.2 Community  facilities  comprise  specific  buildings  (and associated  land)  for a range  of 
uses  including  (but not exclusively): 
Health  facilities 
Emergency  services  i.e. ambulance,  fire & police 
Educational  establishments,  such  as schools  and colleges 
Community  centres  and village  halls 
Leisure  and cultural  facilities 
Allotments 
Public  houses 
Places  of worship 
Libraries 
Built sports  facilities 
Cinemas  and theatres 
Formal  sports  pitches  and courts 
Historic  and environmental  points  of interest 
20.3 This policy  is consistent  with the NPPF . Alongside  national  planning  policies  and Policy 
SP.26 (Strategic  Infrastructure),  the Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan will set out the need  for new 
community  facilities  to service  the anticipated  level of housing  growth.  The adopted  Built Facilities 
and Playing  Pitch  Strategies  will further  inform  the application  of this policy . 
20.4 The policy  allows  for changes  under  the Localism  Act 2011. This permits  the listing  of 
Community  Assets,  the Community  Right  to Challenge  (in delivering  public  services)  and the 
encouragement  of communities  to run their own facilities,  or for a community  to plan for its local 
area through  neighbourhood  planning.  This allows  for the consideration  of a wider  range  of 
community  services  when  appropriate,  acknowledging  that the importance  of particular  facilities 
will vary between  communities.  It is essential  that the community  is involved  in considering  the 
merits  of any new facility  and the suitability  of proposals  for alternative  forms  of use. 
20.5 Wyre Forest  District  Council  wish to protect  valuable  community  facilities  and services 
that play an important  role in the social  infrastructure  of the District  and help to secure  sustainable 
communities.  These  mainly  local facilities  are particularly  important  in helping  to maintain  a high 
quality  of life for local residents,  some  of whom  have  limited  access  to alternative  facilities  further 
afield.  Under  certain  circumstances  it may be more  appropriate  to look to combining  or 
rationalising  facilities  in a locality  rather  than replicate  through  a new proposal.  In situations 
where  a facility  may be redundant,  no longer  fit for purpose  and/or  incompatible  with existing 
surrounding  uses  a robust  assessment  should  have  taken  place. 
Wyre Forest  District 
139 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 20 Community  Facilities 20.6 In the case  of any proposals  that would  result  in the loss of a community  facility , a 
satisfactory  assessment  should  be undertaken  (using  recognised  national  methodology , e.g. 
Sport  England),  that proves  there  is a surplus  of similar  provision  in the appropriate  catchment 
area for that particular  facility  and the site or building  is not needed  for any other  community 
service/use;  or that the facility  would  be replaced  by equivalent  or better  provision  in terms  of 
location,  quantity  or quality;  and, if the development  is for an alternative  sports  or recreation 
provision,  the need  for it must  outweigh  the loss of the existing  community  facility . 
20.7 When  applying  these  tests  to specific  proposals,  the Local  Planning  Authority  will have 
full regard  to the particular  characteristics,  needs,  service  priorities  and objectives  of the service 
or organisation  concerned.  The implications  of maintaining  and running  new facilities  will also 
be an important  consideration. 
20.8 For urban  areas,  proposed  facilities  should  ideally  be located  within  development 
boundaries.  Within  rural areas,  proposals  should  be located  within,  or adjoining,  the settlement 
subject  to compliance  with other  relevant  policies. 
Policy  DM.7-  Open  Space 
1. Open  space  is identified  on the Policies  Map and includes  a range  of private  and public 
open  spaces  and associated  community  facilities.  Open  Space  sites will be safeguarded 
from development  unless: 
a. The loss resulting  from the proposed  development  would  be replaced  by equivalent 
or better  provision  in terms  of quantity  or quality  in a suitable  location;  or 
b. An assessment  has been  undertaken  which  has clearly  shown  the open  space, 
buildings  or land to be surplus  to requirements;  or 
c. The development  is for alternative  sports  and recreational  provision,  the benefits 
of which  clearly  outweigh  the loss of the current  or former  use. 
2. Any new open  space  for recreation  or sport  secured  through  new development  will be 
designated  and protected  as Open  Space,  in accordance  with Policy  DM.7. 
3. Local  Green  Space  allocated  by Neighbourhood  Plans  will be supported  if the proposal 
is compliant  with the NPPF;  and 
a. Is in reasonably  close  proximity  to the community  it serves; 
b. Is demonstrably  special  to a local community  and holds  a particular  local 
significance;  and 
c. Is local in character  and is not an extensive  tract of land. 
Reasoned  Justification 
20.9 Well-designed,  attractive  and functional  open  space  is an essential  component  for a 
high quality  of life. It contributes  positively  to biodiversity , health  and the character  of an area 
and can also help to mitigate  the impacts  of extreme  temperatures  and flash  flooding. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 140 Community  Facilities 20 20.10  The NPPF  emphasises  the benefits  of recreational  open  space  in terms  of its contribution 
to creating  sustainable  patterns  of urban  and rural development,  its role in maintaining  strong 
and vibrant  communities  and the associated  promotion  of health  and well-being.  Open  space 
for recreation  and sport  can also deliver  a number  of Green  Infrastructure  objectives,  often 
simultaneously . 
20.11 There  is a wide range  of types  of open  space  across  Wyre Forest;  for example,  playing 
fields,  recreation  grounds,  allotments,  cemeteries,  parks  and amenity  green  space.  They  are 
all part of and contribute  to the Green  Infrastructure  both within  and outside  settlements.  Some 
open  space  may not specifically  be recognised  for biodiversity  value  but will contain  elements 
that will need  to be considered  when  valuing  green  space.  Other  open  spaces  have  high 
ecological  or landscape  value  and are protected  elsewhere  in the Plan,  e.g. Green  Infrastructure 
(Policy  SP.28) and Biodiversity  & Geodiversity  (Policy  SP.23 and SP.24). 
20.12  The Policies  Map identifies  the Open  Space  sites from the Wyre Forest  Open  Space, 
Built Facilities  and Playing  Pitch  Strategies.  Policy  DM.7  aims  to protect  the open  spaces  that 
are identified  on the Policies  Map,  together  with numerous  incidental  open  spaces  which  are too 
small  to include  but that nonetheless  contribute  to the quality  and character  of their local areas. 
These  small  local spaces  are often  valued  and used  heavily  by local communities  and are 
therefore  worthy  of policy  protection.  Whilst  most  open  spaces  are publicly  accessible,  some 
are in private  ownership,  although  they nonetheless  perform  valuable  functions  such  as 
contributing  to biodiversity , the character  of the area and providing  a sense  of openness  and 
space. 
Open  Space,  Sports  Pitches  and Outdoor  Community  Uses  in Housing  Development 
20.13  The District  currently  has 98 football  pitches,  15 rugby  pitches  of which  10 are senior , 
1 junior  pitch  and 4 mini pitches,  2 hockey  pitches  and 11 cricket  fields.  Additionally  Wyre Forest 
District  currently  has 2 full size 3G pitches  and 6 small  3G pitches. 
Policy  DM.8  - Provision  for Open  Space,  Sports  Pitches  and Outdoor  Community 
Uses  in Housing  Development 
1. The Council  will require  any major  development,  subject  to viability , to make  provision 
in accordance  with the following  principles: 
a. On-site  provision  which  meets  local needs  for open  space,  sport  and play; 
b. Off-site  contributions  instead  of an on-site  contribution  where  it can be 
demonstrated  that on-site  provision  is not feasible  or viable; 
c. Contributions  towards  the enhancement  of existing  open  space  and/or  creation 
of new areas  of open  space  and/or  sports  facilities  where  the development  would 
otherwise  lead to a deficiency; 
d. Provision  of open  space  in the most  accessible  possible  locations  including  access 
by cycle  routes  and provision  for walking  and cycling; 
e. Play and recreation  spaces  for children  and young  people  including  the provision 
of play equipment  for special  needs  children; 
Wyre Forest  District 
141 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 20 Community  Facilities f. Creation  of historic  and/or  environmental  interpretation  features,  where  appropriate; 
and 
g. Street  trees  (where  appropriate  and subject  to long-term  maintenance 
arrangements). 
2. The Council  will apply  the following  standards  to new development: 
a. Development  proposals  for 10 or more  dwellings  should  make  provision  for open 
Space  and outdoor  community  uses,  as set out in Table 20.0.1  (see below), 
together  with secure  arrangements  for its long-term  management  and on-going 
maintenance  by the developer , Town Council,  Parish  Council,  or other  community 
organisation.  Enhancing  accessibility  to these  open  spaces,  e.g. through 
improvements  to the Rights  of Way Network,  is strongly  encouraged. 
b. The Council  will require  developers  to establish  a mechanism  by which  public 
open  space  will be maintained  to an agreed  standard.  The mechanism  must  be 
secured  and in place  prior to commencement  and it must  be operational  prior to 
occupation  of no more  than 80% of the development. 
c. On-site  provision  of open  space  will have  regard  to the following  accessibility 
standards: 
i. Children's  Play Space  (safe  walking  distances  to dwellings) 
ii. Local  Area  for Play (LAP)  - within  100m 
iii. Local  Equipped  Area  for Play (LEAP)  - within  400m 
iv. Neighbourhood  Equipped  Area  for Play (NEAP)  - within  1km 
d. Playing  pitches:  within  1.2km  of dwellings  or within  20 minutes  drive  in the rural 
areas  of the District 
e. In addition  to Table 20.0.1,  the precise  amount,  type and form of outdoor  community 
use will be informed  by local evidence  e.g. Neighbourhood  Plans  and Playing 
Pitch  Strategy . 
f. New open  space  should  be designed  to be multi-functional  and be of a size, type 
and quality  to meet  site, local and strategic  needs.  Where  new sport  and recreation 
facilities  are provided  as part of a development,  they will be created  in accordance 
with Sport  England  technical  standards.  Where  replacement  facilities  are being 
provided,  equivalent  quality  and quantity  or greater  will be required. 
g. Ongoing  management  and maintenance  of public  open  space,  sports,  play, leisure 
and recreation  facilities  must  be considered  at the outset  of the planning  and 
design  of a development  and this should  inform  the type,  amount  and layout  of 
provision  proposed. 
h. Where  a development  is in proximity  to an existing  community  facility , green  space 
or biodiversity  asset,  the developer  will need  to enhance  or buffer the existing 
asset  to mitigate  any increase  in demand  put on that asset  by the new development. 
i. Proposals  must  provide  an assessment  which  demonstrates  how they have 
responded  to and addressed  the issues  and requirements  of the Council’ s 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 142 Community  Facilities 20 strategies  as identified  in the Open  Space  audit,  Playing  Pitch  Strategy  and other 
relevant  strategies  and their subsequent  updates.   
3. On-site  provision  of open  space  will have  regard  to the following  accessibility  standards: 
a. Children’ s Play Space  (safe  walking  distances  to dwellings): 
i. Local  Area  for Play (LAP)  - within  100m. 
ii. Local  Equipped  Area  for PLay  (LEAP)  - within  400m. 
iii. Neighbourhood  Equipped  Area  for Play (NEAP)  - within  1km. 
b. Playing  Pitches:  within  1.2km  of dwellings  or within  20 minutes  drive  in the rural 
areas  of the District. 
Table 20.0.1  Open  Space  Requirements 
Open  space 
requirement  for District 
2016-2036  (hectares) Total current 
hectares Quantity  standard 
(hectares  per 1000 
population) Type of Open  Space 
6.92 56.20 0.56 Parks  and Gardens 
52.67 426.22 4.26 Natural  and Semi  Natural 
9.64 77.81 0.78 Amenity  Green  Space 
2.23 17.6 0.18 Allotments 
1.48 12.17 0.12 Provision  for Children  and Young 
People 
Reasoned  Justification 
20.14  The NPPF  advocates  improving  the conditions  in which  people  live and take their 
leisure.  A high quality  built environment,  including  the spaces  within  it, plays  an important  social 
role in the delivery  of sustainable  development.  The NPPF  also requires  local planning  authorities 
to plan positively  for the provision  of community  facilities  and spaces.  This Policy  should  be 
read in conjunction  with Policy  SP.26 (Strategic  Infrastructure),  Policy  SP.28 (Green 
Infrastructure),  and the Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan (IDP). 
20.15  The Council  requires  major  development  to provide  and/or  contribute  to the provision 
of multi-functional  open  space  which  serves  and meets  the needs  of the development  as well 
as local needs,  including  those  with disabilities  and wider  needs,  subject  to viability . The need 
for open  space,  sport  and recreational  facilities  must  be assessed  to determine  what  provision 
is needed. 
Wyre Forest  District 
143 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 20 Community  Facilities 20.16  Sport  England’ s Playing  Pitch  Demand  Calculator  calculates  a development’ s playing 
pitch  requirements.  The calculator  identifies  associated  costs  for providing  the required  pitches 
and associated  ancillary  facilities  (such  as changing  rooms  and car parking)  to meet  the demand 
generated  by the development;  whether  there  is capacity  within  existing  pitches  to meet  the 
demand  generated  by the development;  or whether  additional  provision  is required  needs  to 
be considered,  taking  into account  evidence  in the Playing  Pitch  Strategy . 
20.17  It is considered  that the provision  of new functional  open  space  and other  facilities  is 
necessary  in order  to achieve  active,  healthy  and integrated  communities.  The type and size 
of the residential  proposal  will also be a factor  in determining  the make-up  of the various 
community  use typologies.  Over-provision  in any single  typology  does  not negate  the need  to 
provide  for other  typologies.  In addition  to parks,  open  spaces  and recreation  areas,  the provision 
of amenity  space  is an important  aspect  of the urban  environment.  The increasing  emphasis 
on higher  density  residential  development  raises  the importance  of outdoor  amenity  space  as 
an integral  consideration  in the design  of new developments.  It provides  opportunities  for play, 
outdoor  relaxation  and social  interaction.  The continued  provision  of adequate  children's  play 
space  is considered  to be an important  component  for new development. 
20.18  For larger  developments  the expectation  will be that the development  will provide  new 
sports  pitches  on site. However , in accordance  with Policy  DM.8,  in cases  where  it is 
demonstrated  that this is not feasible  or appropriate,  an off-site  contribution  will be required. 
The size of the proposed  residential  development  may not create  demand  for a whole  pitch.  In 
such  cases,  it may be appropriate  to secure  a financial  contribution  to increase  the capacity  of 
an existing  site or to contribute  financially  to new provision  off-site.  Consideration  should  be 
given  to identifying  suitable  investment  priorities  that could  serve  the proposed  development 
and which  could  benefit  from a contribution  towards  increasing  capacity  to meet  demand 
generated  from the development,  taking  into account  the findings  of the Playing  Pitch  Strategy . 
If financial  contributions  are found  to be preferable,  the Playing  Pitch  Strategy  Action  Plan should 
be used  to identify  existing  sites for investment. 
20.19  The Council’ s Playing  Pitch  Strategy  identifies  shortfalls  of provision  to meet  quantitative 
needs  for football  (both  natural  grass  pitches  and artificial  grass  pitches)  and rugby  union, 
qualitative  improvements  to grass  pitches  for all pitch  sports  and the need  for provision  of new 
and improved  changing  room  facilities.  It also identifies  the need  for two 3G additional  artificial 
grass  pitches  for football,  and there  is a need  to re-surface  an existing  hockey  pitch  at Stourport 
Sports  Club. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 144 Community  Facilities 20 21.1 Wyre Forest  District  Council  wants  to encourage  business  into the District  and for those 
already  in the District  to be able to expand  and adapt  to changing  markets.  The District  needs 
to be able to adapt  to new and flexible  working  practices  such  as homeworking  and live/work 
units  to ensure  that there  are a wide range  of employment  opportunities  within  the District  in 
conformity  with NPPF  paragraph  82. Policies  within  this chapter  should  be read in conjunction 
with Policy  SP.17 which  is the strategic  policy  'A Diverse  Local  Economy'. 
21.2 Wyre Forest  District  Council  commissioned  an Employment  Land  Review  (ELR)  for the 
District  which  was published  June  2016;  this was updated  in October  2018.  It assessed  economic 
development  needs  across  the District  objectively  in line with the revised  NPPF  and Planning 
Practice  Guidance.  The report  found  that the majority  of businesses  within  Wyre Forest  District 
(89.6%)  are micro  businesses  which  mean  that they employ  0-9 employees;  this figure  is slightly 
higher  than the figure  for West Midlands  (89.1%)  and Great  Britain  (89.5%).  Wyre Forest  District 
has seen  an increase  of micro  firms  within  the District  of 1.9%  since  2015,  this is more  than the 
increase  seen  in the West Midlands  (1.4%)  and for Great  Britain  (1.2%).  Large  firms  employing 
in excess  of 250 employees  only account  for 0.3%  of businesses  within  the District  versus  0.4% 
in the West Midlands  and Great  Britain.  The updated  2018  Employment  Land  Review  identified 
the need  for at least  an additional  29 hectares  of employment  land which  includes  employment 
generating  uses  such  as nursing  homes.  Table 9.0.1  in chapter  9 A Good  Place  to do Business, 
shows  sites allocated  for employment  uses.  The employment  allocation  sites are also shown 
on the Policies  Map and site specific  policies  can be found  in Part C of the Plan. 
21.3 The South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park area is a key employment  and regeneration 
focus  for Wyre Forest  District.  To help encourage  business  growth  within  the district  a Local 
Development  Order  (LDO)  for this area was implemented  in August  2012.  The LDO introduced 
permitted  development  to any site within  the boundaries  of the South  Kidderminster  Enterprise 
Park.  The LDO was revised  for a further  3 years  in 2015.  Owing  to the success  of the LDO,  it 
was renewed  again  in August  2018  for a further  three  years  running  until August  2021.  The 
LDO has been  used  by 17 businesses  and developments  and has provided  circa  £25 million 
of economic  investment  since  its initial  adoption  in 2012.  It is hoped  that it will continue  to attract 
inward  investment  to the area in the future.  The South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park is shown 
on the Policies  Map. 
21.4 Wyre Forest  District  is located  within  two Local  Enterprise  Partnerships  (LEPs): 
Worcestershire  LEP and Greater  Birmingham  and Solihull  LEP. The involvement  of the District 
in both Partnerships  reflects  the economic  geography  of an area that has strong  ties with both 
the county  in which  it is located,  Worcestershire,  as well as the larger  urban  conurbation  of 
Birmingham  and its surrounding  areas. 
21.5 It is important  that the Council's  planning  documents,  wherever  possible,  reflect  the aims 
and ambitions  of the LEPs  ensuring  that the District  continues  to be a place  for businesses  to 
operate  and to grow . 
21.6 Over  the past few years  there  has been  a rise in the levels  of home  working  in the UK. 
According  to the Office for National  Statistics  (ONS)  the number  of home  workers  in the UK 
amounted  to 4.2 million  in the first three  months  of 2014,  equivalent  to 13.9%  of the total 
workforce.  Wyre Forest  has around  5,300  workers  who work  mainly  at or from home,  which  is 
equivalent  to the national  rate of 13.9%  of the workplace  population. 
Wyre Forest  District 
145 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 21 Employment  Land Employment  Development 
Policy  DM.9  - Economic  Development 
The employment  allocation  sites are shown  on the Policies  Map and are safeguarded  for 
employment  use in Policy  SP.17. 
1. In addition  to sites allocated  specifically  for employment  uses,  the provision  of 
employment  land and the conversion  of existing  buildings  to support  job creation 
throughout  the District  will be supported  if they are in conformity  with other  policies  in 
the Plan and providing  it can be demonstrated  that the new employment  use can 
integrate  effectively  with surrounding  uses  and is of an appropriate  scale  to the location. 
2. Planning  permission  for the change  of use to alternative  uses  of land or buildings  which 
are allocated  for employment  use (as shown  on the Policies  Map),  or were  last used 
for employment  purposes  within  use class  B2, B8, Class  E (g) offices (other  than 
professional  and financial  services  offices),  research  and development  and light 
industrial  use will only be granted  where: 
a. A financial  appraisal  demonstrates  that redevelopment  for any employment 
generating  use is unviable  and is unlikely  to achieve  viability  within  5 years;  and 
b. Details  are provided  of active  marketing  of the premises  / land for at least  12 
months  and appropriate  to the prevailing  market  conditions;  and/or 
c. The proposed  use would  be compatible  with adjacent  land uses  and not prejudice 
the amenity , lawful  operation,  viability  or future  development  of other  businesses. 
3. Where  the above  criteria  are met and there  is no reasonable  prospect  of a site being 
used  for employment  use, applications  for alternative  uses  of land or buildings  will be 
treated  on their merits  having  regard  to market  signals  and the relative  need  for different 
land uses  to support  sustainable  local communities.  They  must  also be in accordance 
with other  policies  within  this Plan. 
Economic  Development  outside  Allocated  Areas 
4. Proposals  for economic  development  outside  of the allocated  areas  will be prioritised 
following  the sequential  approach  of: 
a. Previously  developed  sites; 
b. Greenfield  infill sites within  a settlement  outside  the Green  Belt; 
c. Greenfield  sites adjacent  to a settlement  outside  the Green  Belt. 
5. They  will be assessed  on their individual  merits  and should  be fully in accordance  with 
other  policies  within  this Plan. 
Hazardous  Substances 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 146 Employment  Land 21 6. Proposals  for development  or activities  involving  hazardous  substances,  or development 
adjoining  an area where  hazardous  substances  already  exist,  will only be permitted 
where  the relevant  authorities  are satisfied  that the proposals  are acceptable.  Where 
necessary , appropriate  measures  to protect  the public  and environment  will be required. 
Waste Developments  on Employment  Land 
7. Development  for waste  facilities  will also be considered  favourably  within  the designated 
employment  locations,  subject  to proposals  being  in conformity  with the other  policies 
in the Plan and the Waste Core  Strategy  for Worcestershire. 
Reasoned  Justification 
21.7 To achieve  sustainable  growth  within  the District  we need  to create  opportunities  for 
people  to work.  Wyre Forest  District  Council  aims  to ensure  that the right amount  of suitable 
land is available  to attract  business  to the District  and enable  existing  businesses  to grow . In 
Part C of the Local  Plan,  there  are site specific  policies  for the sites allocated  for employment 
uses. 
21.8 Proposals  involving  hazardous  substances  will need  to be carefully  assessed.  Any 
decision  will be made  having  regard  to the advice  of the Health  and Safety  Executive,  the degree 
of risk and the likely  hazard  or consequences  of an accident  occurring.  Proposals  for development 
in close  proximity  to existing  hazardous  installations  will also be carefully  assessed  to ensure 
that these  proposals  are safe and acceptable  with the appropriate  authorities. 
21.9 The Waste Core  Strategy  for Worcestershire  was adopted  in November  2012  and forms 
part of the statutory  Development  Plan for the District.  The Waste Core  Strategy  sets out a long 
term vision  for waste  management  within  Worcestershire  and outlines  areas  of land that may 
be suitable  for development  of new facilities.  Waste management  facilities  are often  akin to 
business  or industrial  activities  and, when  directed  to the right locations,  they can provide 
economic  opportunities  without  having  adverse  impacts  on their surroundings.  Therefore,  it is 
considered  appropriate  to allow  for the principle  of development  of waste  management  facilities 
on allocated  employment  sites,  subject  to the proposals  being  in line with the other  policies 
included  in the Local  Development  Plan and the Waste Core  Strategy  for Worcestershire. 
Rural  Employment 
Policy  DM.10  - Rural  Employment 
1. Agriculture  is an important  industry  in rural areas  within  Wyre Forest  District  both for 
the production  of food and for employment.  Support  will be given  for the sustainable 
growth  and development  of agricultural  and other  rural businesses  that are in conformity 
with other  policies  in the plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
147 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 21 Employment  Land 2. To help promote  rural regeneration  existing  employment  sites in rural areas  that are 
currently  or were  last used  for B2, B8, Class  E (g) offices (other  than professional  and 
financial  services  offices),  research  and development,  light industrial  uses,  tourism, 
leisure  and/or  recreation  related  purposes  will be safeguarded  for the existing  use 
during  the plan period,  unless  it has been  demonstrated  that the site has been  actively 
marketed  for a period  of at least  12 months  and that it is no longer  viable  in its existing 
use. 
3. The expansion  of existing  employment  sites in rural areas  will be supported  where  it 
has been  demonstrated  that intensification  of the existing  site is not viable  or practical 
subject  to compliance  with other  relevant  policies. 
4. The redevelopment  of existing  previously  developed  land,  outside  the Green  Belt, for 
economic  development  purposes  will be allowed,  where  this would  result  in a more 
acceptable,  sustainable  and better  designed  development  than would  be achieved 
through  conversion  or reuse. 
5. Proposals  to diversify  farm businesses  for employment,  tourism,  leisure  and recreation 
uses  will be permitted  providing: 
a. The proposed  new use does  not detract  from or prejudice  the existing  agricultural 
undertaking  or its future  operation. 
b. The scale  of activities  associated  with the proposed  development  is appropriate 
to the rural character  of the area. 
c. Wherever  possible  existing  buildings  are used  to reduce  the need  for additional 
built development. 
d. The proposed  new use does  not cause  an unacceptable  rise in vehicular 
movements  that is inappropriate  by virtue  of disturbance  to the character  of the 
area or amenity  of any neighbouring  area. 
Reasoned  Justification 
21.10  The provision  of new rural employment  sites,  especially  the use of previously  developed 
land and sites that physically  relate  well to an existing  settlement,  should  be considered 
favourably  if it is not harmful  to the integrity  of the settlement  or landscape  character . 
21.11 Employment  sites that fall vacant  should  be actively  marketed  before  their conversion 
to an alternative  use such  as residential  and the consequent  loss of a facility/service  providing 
important  local jobs.  The marketing  exercise  will need  to have  regard  to the nature  and scale 
of the site and buildings  and the prevailing  economic  conditions. 
21.12  Rural  employment  sites not only provide  local employment,  they also provide 
opportunities  for new investment  and rejuvenation  through  intensification  or re-use. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 148 Employment  Land 21 21.13  Over  the past few years,  changes  to traditional  farming  methods  have  meant  that many 
farms  need  to diversify  to ensure  their survival.  Diversification  should  be encouraged  but 
agricultural  uses  should  still remain  as the main  focus  of the farm unit. 
Live work  units 
Policy  DM.1 1 - Live Work Units 
1. Proposals  for live/work  units  will be permitted  in sustainable,  appropriate  locations 
within  the rural areas.  The proposal  will need  to be justified  and, where  they involve 
the re-use  of a rural building,  be in accordance  with Rural  Conversion  polices  and other 
policies  within  the Plan. 
2. New developments  including  replacement  buildings  for live/work  units  will be permitted 
in sustainable,  appropriate  locations  within  the rural areas.  The proposal  will need  to 
be justified  and be in accordance  with other  policies  within  the Plan and that the 
following  criteria  are met: 
a. They  are located  on Previously  Developed  Land; 
b. They  do not have  an adverse  impact  on the character , landscape,  residential 
amenity  of neighbouring  occupiers  or wildlife  of the area; 
c. They  do not constitute  inappropriate  development  in the Green  Belt; 
d. Suitable  access  arrangements  can be made  without  the need  for extensive  new 
access  roads. 
3. All Live/W ork proposals  must  also ensure  that: 
a. The work  element  is restricted  to uses  considered  appropriate  to the location,  in 
rural areas  this being  use class  B2,  Class  E(g) offices (other  than professional 
and financial  services  offices),  research  and development,  light industrial  uses 
and appropriate  rural employment  uses  where  there  are no adverse  impacts  on 
surrounding  properties; 
b. The workspace  is designed  to be separate  from the dwelling; 
c. The emphasis  is on the work  element  with residential  use ancillary . This should 
be reflected  in the split of floorspace  with at least  60% afforded  to the workspace 
and no more than 40% for residential; 
d. The workspace  must  be constructed  and available  for occupation  and in use before 
the residential  element  of the scheme  is occupied. 
4. Normally  the residential  accommodation  should  contain  no more  than three  bedrooms, 
and residential  and work  spaces  should  have  separate  entrances  and toilet  facilities. 
Wyre Forest  District 
149 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 21 Employment  Land Reasoned  Justification 
21.14  There  has been  an increase  in self-employment  and home  working  and increasing  use 
of technology  amongst  many  growth  sectors.  It is therefore  important  that Wyre Forest  District 
Council  monitors  and responds  to these  changing  preferences,  to ensure  that business  needs 
can be met within  the District. 
21.15  Live work  units  differ from homeworking  in that homeworking  uses  a small  proportion 
of a residential  unit for generally  office work  whilst  live work  units  are a business  being  run from 
the same  place  that the worker  resides.  The employment  aspect  is the main  use with the 
residential  area as an ancillary  use. 
21.16  Live work  units  can make  use of redundant  rural buildings  and afford opportunities  for 
farm diversification  or they may be purpose  built on previously  developed  land.  The emphasis 
should  be on the work  element  of the building  but the two uses  should  be separate  and should 
not have  an adverse  effect on the surrounding  area.  Policy  criteria  need  to be set to ensure  that 
proposals  are genuinely  intended  for employment  purposes.  The approved  development  may 
be controlled  by planning  conditions  or a legal  obligation  governing  the use of the premises  and 
other  relevant  matters  such  as the number  of non-resident  employees  who can work  at the 
premises.  The removal  of permitted  development  rights  for change  of use of all or part of the 
premises  or for residential  extensions  may also be considered  appropriate.  The size of the  
business  area must  be justified  to ensure  that a larger  than necessary  business  area is not 
constructed  just to enable  a larger  dwelling  to be built. 
Offices 
Policy  DM.12  – Offices 
Office accommodation  will be permitted  where  it does  not cause  an adverse  effect on 
the built,  historic  and natural  environment  and will be focussed  on the three  town 
centres  and allocated  employment  areas.  The main  town  centres  should  be considered 
first, then edge  of centre  locations;  and only if suitable  sites are not available  (or 
expected  to become  available  within  a reasonable  period)  should  out of centre  sites 
be considered. 
Small  scale  offices of less than 500sqm  in rural areas  outside  the Green  Belt will also 
be supported  where  appropriate. 
Reasoned  Justification 
21.17  The majority  of offices within  the District  are located  in Kidderminster . The demand  for 
office accommodation  tends  to be from small,  mainly  professional,  companies  and businesses 
wanting  small  office accommodation.  The demand  is generally  local as the market  does  not 
attract  a high number  of occupiers  from outside  of the District.  The area faces  competition  from 
larger  conurbations  such  as Birmingham  and locations  in proximity  to the strategic  motorway 
network. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 150 Employment  Land 21 21.18  In Wyre Forest  District  the majority  of offices tend to be small  units  above  retail  units 
in the town centre,  ancillary  office units on industrial  estates  or buildings  that have  been  converted 
to offices such  as Elgar  House.  Very few offices are purpose  built.  If the District  had a supply 
of offices that were  accessible  and had parking  they would  achieve  a higher  rental  value  and 
could  attract  inward  investment. 
21.19  The figure  of less than 500 sqm used  for small  scale  offices is the figure  used  for 
development  in The Town and Country  Planning  (General  Permitted  Development)  (England) 
Order  2015  as amended. 
21.20  Loss  of office floorspace  has an adverse  effect on business,  employment  and the 
character  of the District  and will therefore  be resisted  where  possible. 
21.21  Some  low cost offices are required  to meet  the requirements  of the voluntary  sector 
and start up businesses. 
Wyre Forest  District 
151 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 21 Employment  Land 22.1 Town centres  are crucial  to the social,  economic  and environmental  wellbeing  of the 
District.  The concentration  of a range  of goods,  services  and facilities  in one area creates  a 
centre  for communities  and enables  people  to make  one trip for many  reasons.  The District’ s 
settlement  hierarchy  of towns  are Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  (see Policy 
SP.2). It is this hierarchy  that provides  the basis  for identifying  the locations  for new retail,  leisure 
and commercial  development.  Further  retail  development  should  be directed  towards 
Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley . 
22.2 The main  retail  centre  is Kidderminster  which  has the widest  choice  of retail  facilities 
within  the District.  Since  the development  of Weavers  Wharf  (opened  2005),  the shopping  centre 
has moved  westwards  away  from the traditional  town  centre  which  was based  around  Worcester 
Street,  High Street  and Vicar Street.  However  town  centres  have  changed  and are still changing 
as retail  patterns  have  altered  with the increase  in internet  shopping  and click and collect.  This 
means  that Kidderminster  town  centre  needs  to change  its role from mainly  retail  to a variety 
of additional  uses  that will include  residential,  recreation,  leisure,  employment  and offices to 
ensure  that the town  centre  is vibrant. 
22.3 In 2016  Wyre Forest  District  Council  commissioned  a Retail  and Commercial  Leisure 
Needs  Study  (Boyer  2016).  The conclusion  of this study  was that Kidderminster  is the main 
shopping  centre  in the District,  however  there  is an imbalance  created  by the Weavers  Wharf 
development  which  is the dominant  element  within  the town  centre.  Due to this there  is a need 
to regenerate  the eastern  part of the town  centre.  Consequent  to the Retail  report  by Boyer  the 
primary  shopping  area and primary  and secondary  shopping  frontage  areas  in Kidderminster 
have  been  revised  owing  to the impact  of the Weavers  Wharf  development.  This is shown  on 
the Kidderminster  Retail  map in Appendix  d. 
22.4 Stourport-on-Severn  offers a range  of retail  facilities  and services  which  include 
supermarkets  as well as individual  specialist  shops  to serve  the town  with more  retail  facilities 
in Kidderminster  which  is situated  3 miles  away . 
22.5 Bewdley  is the smallest  of the towns  within  the District  and its retailing  function  reflects 
its size and role within  the area.  The retail  core is compact  and focussed  on Load  Street.  Bewdley 
provides  an important  top-up  shopping  destination  with a range  of convenience  goods  and 
services. 
Town Centre  Development 
Policy  DM.13  - Town Centre  Development 
1. Large  scale  retail  development  (2,500sqm  net and above)  and commercial  or leisure 
uses  should  be targeted  towards  Kidderminster  as the strategic  centre  of the District 
followed  by Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  in a sequential  approach.  Proposals  for 
new retail  development  (of more  than 500sqm  gross),  or proposals  regarding  the 
removal  of restrictive  retail  conditions,  (condition  that restricts  retail  use) will only be 
permitted  where  a sequential  approach  has been  followed  and it is demonstrated  that: 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 152 Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22 a. It is within  the Primary  Shopping  Area.  These  areas  are where  retail  development 
is concentrated  and generally  comprises  the primary  and those  secondary  shopping 
frontages  which  are adjoining  and closely  related  to the primary  shopping  frontage. 
b. If edge-of-centre,  that the proposals  cannot  be accommodated  within  the Primary 
Shopping  Area. 
2. Support  will be given  to proposals  that safeguard,  maintain  and enhance  the vitality 
and viability  of the existing  retail  centres  throughout  the District  without  causing  adverse 
effects  on the built and natural  environment  and that are of a scale  that is appropriate 
to its location. 
3. In secondary  shopping  frontages,  support  will be given  for alternative  uses that maintain 
or enhance  the vitality  and viability  of the Town Centre's  retail  and commercial 
offer. Proposals  must  demonstrate  that the building  is fully used  avoiding  vacant  floors. 
Proposals  to introduce  residential  development  above  ground  floor within  the Primary 
Shopping  Area  will be supported.  Within  secondary  shopping  frontages,  residential 
development  at ground  floor will be considered  in accordance  with other  policies  within 
the plan and on their individual  merits.  This will help to improve  the vitality  of the centres 
without  compromising  the core retail  function  of the towns.   
4. Support  will be given  for the appropriate  development  for the regeneration  of the eastern 
gateway  area of Kidderminster  town  centre. 
5. Within  the defined  Primary  Shopping  Frontage,  which  is likely  to include  a high 
proportion  of retail  uses,  development  proposals  for retail  use at ground  floor will be 
permitted  where: 
a. The scale  and type of development  proposed  is directly  related  to the role and 
function  of the centre  and its catchment  area and it contributes  to the provision  of 
a safe environment. 
b. There  would  be no adverse  impact  on the vitality  and viability  of the centre  or other 
centres 
c. They  provide  an active  frontage  and are open  for business  during  the day. 
Reasoned  Justification 
22.6 The NPPF  (paragraph  85) states  that planning  policies  should  support  the role that town 
centres  play at the heart  of local communities,  by taking  a positive  approach  to their growth, 
management  and adaptation.  The NPPF  requires  Local  Planning  Authorities  to define  a network 
and hierarchy  of town  centres  and promote  their vitality  and viability , allowing  them  to grow  and 
diversify  allowing  a mix of uses  including  residential.  Town centres  and primary  shopping  areas 
should  be defined  with a range  of uses  in each  centre.  Sites  should  be allocated  to meet  likely 
need,  where  town  centre  sites are not available  then edge  of centre  sites should  be considered. 
22.7 Town centres  are extremely  important  to communities  and Wyre Forest  District  Council 
wishes  to support  town  centre  viability  and vitality  and to pursue  policies  that promote  town 
centre  development  creating  thriving  town  centres.  Policy  DM.13  should  be read in conjunction 
with Policy  SP.18 which  is the strategic  policy  relating  to Town Centre  Development. 
Wyre Forest  District 
153 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 22 Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22.8 Kidderminster , being  at the top of the retail  hierarchy , will be the preferred  location  for 
major  leisure,  office and retail  developments  and other  uses  that attract  large  numbers  of people. 
Other  centres  are suitable  for day-to-day  food and non-food  shopping,  small-scale  leisure  uses 
and local service  and facility  provision  (NPPF  paragraph  85). 
22.9 The retail  sector  and town  centres  are undergoing  a period  of significant  change  due to 
the continuing  popularity  and convenience  provided  by out-of-town  facilities  and the increasing 
adoption  of online  and click and collect  shopping.  Therefore,  alternative  uses  such  as leisure 
and residential  within  town  centres  may add to the viability  and vitality . 
22.10  Retail  development  should  be focussed  on existing  centres  in order  to strengthen  and, 
where  necessary , regenerate  them.  Wherever  possible,  growth  should  be accommodated  by 
more  efficient  use of land and buildings  within  existing  centres.  This approach  will help maintain 
the historic  character  of town  centres  and provides  opportunities  to minimise  the consumption 
of non-renewable  resources  by reusing  existing  buildings  and reducing  the need  to travel  to 
out-of-centre  retail  parks. 
22.11 The Primary  Shopping  Area  is a defined  area where  retail  development  is concentrated 
(generally  comprising  the primary  and those  secondary  frontages  which  are contiguous  and 
closely  related  to the primary  shopping  frontage).  Primary  frontages  are likely  to include  a high 
proportion  of retail  uses.  Secondary  frontages  provide  greater  opportunities  for a diversity  of 
uses  and often  provide  complementary  uses  to the core retail  function  that exists  within  the 
primary  frontage.  Maps  showing  the primary  shopping  area and primary  and secondary  shopping 
frontages  for Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  are to be found  in Appendix  d. 
22.12  Proposals  involving  a change  of use of ground  floor premises  in the Primary  Shopping 
Frontage  should  complement  the retail  offer and should  not lead to an over dominance  of 
non-retail  uses  or 'dead'  frontage,  which  would  detract  from the overall  retail  experience.   
22.13  Throughout  the retail  chapter  of this Plan a number  of policies  have  regard  to a threshold 
of 500sqm  (gross).(37) This permissive  approach  towards  small-scale  development  provides 
flexibility  to existing  retailers  and promotes  appropriate  community  shopping  facilities.  To avoid 
duplication  this point  has not been  added  into each  reasoned  justification  but is relevant  to 
each.   
22.14  Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  are classed  as market  towns.  Stourport-on-Severn 
offers leisure  and shopping  facilities  to its residents  and its canal  and riverside  assets  continue 
to be a key visitor  attraction.  Its public  realm  is enhanced  through  the restoration  of its unique 
heritage  including  the canal  basins.  Bewdley  remains  a thriving  market  town  which  meets  the 
local community’ s needs.  The town’ s Georgian  historic  character  is preserved  and it is a popular 
riverside  destination. 
22.15  The geography  of the District  means  that Kidderminster  is just 3 miles  from each  of 
the market  towns.  Therefore,  the need  for Bewdley  and Stourport-on-Severn  to provide  facilities 
and services  should  be balanced  with their proximity  to Kidderminster  and the services  it provides 
in its function  as the strategic  centre  of the District. 
37 Gross  retail  floorspace:  the total built floor area measured  externally  which  is occupied  exclusively  by a retailer  or retailers; 
excluding  open  areas  used  for the storage,  display  or sale of goods  . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 154 Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22 Out of Town Retail 
Policy  DM.14  - Edge  of Centre  and Out of Town development 
1. Edge  of centre  is a location  that is well connected  with the town  centre  and the primary 
shopping  area.  Proposals  for new, or an extension  to existing,  edge  or out-of-centre 
retail,  offices,  entertainment  or leisure  development  in excess  of 500sq.m  gross 
floorspace  will be required  to submit  a sequential  test and an impact  assessment 
demonstrating  that there  would  be no adverse  impact  on the vitality  and viability  of a 
town  centre  as a whole.  The Council  will refuse  planning  permission  where  there  is 
evidence  that proposals  are likely  to have  significant  adverse  impacts  on the vitality 
and viability  of a town  centre  as a whole. 
2. Before  out of centre  sites are considered  the sequential  approach  must  demonstrate 
why there  are no suitable  or available  sites within  the Primary  Shopping  Area  in the 
first instance  and then edge  of centre  sites.  When  edge  of centre  and out of centre 
locations  are considered,  sites which  are accessible  and well connected  to the town 
centre  will be preferable. 
Reasoned  Justification 
22.16  When  assessing  applications  for retail,  leisure  and office development  at edge  of centre 
and out of centre  locations,  paragraph  90 of the NPPF  states  that local planning  authorities 
should  require  an impact  assessment  if the development  is above  the proportionate  locally  set 
floorspace  threshold.  The threshold  of 500sqm  gross  is a permissive  approach  to small  scale 
development.   
Local  Shops 
22.17  Local  shops  and other  services  play a vital role in promoting  communities'  sustainability 
by helping  to meet  everyday  needs  and reducing  the need  to travel.  The Council  is therefore 
keen  to ensure  that the loss of existing  retail  areas  is resisted,  where  possible. 
Policy  DM.15  - Local  Shops 
1. Planning  permission  for new village  and neighbourhood  shops  or the extension  of 
existing  facilities  will be granted  provided  that the total floor space  does  not exceed 
500sqm  gross  and parking  should  be provided  where  possible. 
2. Existing  retail  and commercial  units (within  use class  E) within  village  or neighbourhood 
centres  will be safeguarded.  Any planning  application  for change  of use will be resisted 
unless  the site has been  actively  marketed  for a minimum  of 12 months  at an 
Wyre Forest  District 
155 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 22 Town Centre  Development  and Retail appropriate  value.  The provision  of new, or the extension  of existing,  small  scale 
commercial  and retail  units  (within  Use Class  E) will be supported,  subject  to the 
resulting  size being  commensurate  with the size of the centre  in which  it is located.   
Reasoned  Justification 
22.18  The provision  of local services  within  walking  distance  of residents'  homes  is an important 
component  in the way a community  functions.  Use Class  E provides  a wide range  of retail  and 
commercial  services  which  should  be retained  unless  it is proven  that such  uses  are no longer 
viable.  Planning  applications  for change  of use should  be supported  with a comprehensive 
marketing  statement  from a suitably  qualified  agency  that demonstrates  that the unit has been 
actively  marketed  for a period  of no less than 12 months  at an appropriate  value.   
Other  forms  of Retailing  – Specialist  Retailing 
22.19  There  are other  forms  of retailing  that do not lend themselves  to being  sited  within 
designated  areas  or neighbourhoods,  yet they often  make  an important  contribution  to the local 
economy . It is important  that the focus  for new retailing  remains  in the most  sustainable  locations, 
following  a sequential  approach,  but there  is a recognition  that other  forms  of retailing  also need 
consideration.  The following  policy  is therefore  proposed  to manage  applications  for 'specialist 
retailing'. 
Policy  DM.16  - Specialist  Retailing 
1. Retail  developments  within  employment  areas  (factory  outlets)  will not be permitted 
unless  they are small  scale  uses  (not exceeding  500sqm  gross)  and related  to or an 
ancillary  part of a business  use. Car showrooms  and vehicle  maintenance,  repair  and 
service  centres  will also be permitted  on land allocated  for B2 and B8 purposes. 
2. Proposals  for convenience  retailing  associated  with petrol  stations  will be permitted 
where  this is clearly  an ancillary  function  to the main  use, is for convenience  goods 
and the floorspace  does  not exceed  500sqm  gross. 
3. Other  forms  of specialist  retailing  will be permitted  where  the retail  element  is ancillary 
to the main  use. Extensions  to existing  operations  should  not lead to an increase  in 
the amount  of retail  floorspace  dedicated  to the sale of comparison  goods.  Where 
necessary , the range  of goods  to be sold from the site may also be limited  by a planning 
condition. 
4. New or expanded  farm shops,  garden  centres  or petrol  filling  stations  will be permitted 
in appropriate  locations  provided: 
a. In the case of farm shops,  the proposal  would  make  use of redundant  or under-used 
buildings  and the range  of goods  to be sold is restricted  to foodstuf fs, plants  and 
rural crafts  produced  locally . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 156 Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22 b. The creation  of new, or extensions  to existing,  garden  centres  or farm shops  in 
the open  countryside  and unrelated  to a settlement  will only be permitted  if the 
proposed  development  is ancillary  to, and on the site of, an existing  horticultural 
business  or existing  farming  operation. 
c. They  do not constitute  inappropriate  development  in the Green  Belt. 
d. The suitability  of the provision  for parking  will be considered  in the light of 
Worcestershire  County  Council's  standards. 
Reasoned  Justification 
22.20  There  are locations  within  the District  where  retail  elements  exist as an ancillary  element 
of another  use. This includes  outlet  shops  in employment  areas,  petrol  filling  stations,  garden 
centres,  and farm shops.  It is important  that any future  proposal  remains  ancillary  to the existing 
use so as to not to undermine  the primary  role. 
22.21  With the loss of many  traditional  independent  retail  outlets,  the operators  of petrol 
stations  have  often  provided  for the convenience  needs  of their localities.  However , the role 
that petrol  filling  stations  play in providing  retail  facilities  should  be limited  to a modest  scale. 
22.22  Traditionally , many  farms  have  sold produce  grown  on the farm to the general  public, 
sometimes  from farm buildings  and in more  recent  years  from 'farm  shops'.  Due to the potential 
impact  of the development  of farm shops,  it is proposed  that the role of the shops  be limited  to 
agricultural  produce  originating  from the farming  unit and its immediate  environment.  If non-local 
agricultural  produce  is required  to be sold (for example  to combat  the issue  of seasonality), 
then this should  remain  subsidiary  to the sale of local agricultural  produce.  The sale of a wider 
range  of goods  not produced  locally  is considered  to be inappropriate  for farm shops. 
22.23  Garden  centres  were  also established  as an ancillary  function  to agricultural  (horticultural) 
production.  However , such  has been  the growth  in the leisure  sector  that there  are now national 
chains  of garden  centres,  many  of which  are dedicated  to the retail  sale of plants  and sundries 
and have  little if any horticultural  production  capabilities.  There  is no reason  as to why these 
facilities  cannot  be located  within  more  urban  areas.  Where  rural garden  centres  do exist,  they 
often  have  a valuable  role to play in the local economy . Nevertheless,  in order  to accord  with 
the retail  strategy  and to preserve  the openness  and character  of the rural landscape,  the Council 
is keen  to ensure  such  facilities  remain  predominantly  ancillary  to horticultural  production. 
Food  and Drink  Retailing 
Policy  DM.17  - Food  and Drink  Retailing 
Development  proposals  involving  the sale of food and drink  must  not have  an adverse 
impact  in terms  of: 
Residential  amenity; 
Pollution  by virtue  of litter, noise  or odour; 
Wyre Forest  District 
157 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 22 Town Centre  Development  and Retail Crime  and Disorder; 
Parking  and highway  safety 
Reasoned  Justification 
22.24  Proposals  specifically  regarding  food and drink  bring  their own issues  and challenges. 
Proposals  involving  consumption  on the premises  can increase  the levels  of liveliness  and 
vibrancy  throughout  the day and night.  Whilst  there  may be problems  associated  with anti-social 
behaviour , such  uses  can also,  conversely , add to the sense  of security  through  ensuring 
maximum  people  presence  and natural  surveillance.  The policy  therefore  seeks  to ensure  that 
premises  for the sale of food and drink  have  due regard  to community  safety  and local amenity . 
Policy  DM.18  - Hot Food  Takeaways 
1. Proposals  for hot food takeaways  will not be permitted  where: 
a. They  would  result  in two or more  hot food takeaways  adjacent  to one another; 
b. Outside  of designated  centres,  hot food takeaways  will not be permitted  where 
the proposal  is within  400m  of the boundary  of a school. 
c. Development  proposals  involving  hot food takeaways  must  not have  an adverse 
impact  in terms  of: 
i. Residential  amenity; 
ii. Pollution  by virtue  of litter, noise  or odour; 
iii. Crime  and disorder 
iv. Parking  and highway  safety 
2. Applications  for hot food takeaways  will, where  it is deemed  necessary , be required 
to include  a health  impact  screening  to assess  whether  a full health  impact  assessment 
is required  (also  see Policy  SP.16 Health  and Well being). 
Reasoned  Justification 
22.25  As part of the evidence  base,  a report  by Worcestershire  County  Council  Public  Health 
summarises  the policy  context  and evidence  which  has informed  Policy  DM.18  to regulate 
takeaways  through  the planning  system. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 158 Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22 22.26  Where  high concentrations  of hot-food  (38)takeaways  occur  in the town  centres,  they 
can pose  a serious  threat  to the local economic  vitality  and viability . It is not uncommon  for hot 
food takeaway  shops  to locate  outside  of town  centres  and high concentrations  exist along 
some  of the key road corridors  such  as the Horsefair  and Comberton  Hill in Kidderminster . In 
addition  to health  issues  and obesity  levels,  hot food takeaway  shops  are more  likely  to have 
a detrimental  impact  on amenity  and on retail  character  and function  of shopping  centres.  Such 
harmful  impacts  relate  to increased  incidence  of litter, smells,  crime  and anti-social  behaviour , 
noise  and general  disturbance,  parking  and traffic problems. 
22.27  Research  indicates  that the more  overweight  a person  is and the earlier  in life a person 
becomes  overweight,  the greater  the impact  on that person’ s health.  It is therefore  considered 
important  to support  the establishment  of healthy  eating  habits  from an early  age and minimise 
the negative  impacts  of hot food takeaways  on childhood  health  (39)In Worcestershire,  in common 
with many  areas  in England,  there  is a general  upward  trend  in the prevalence  of overweight 
and obesity  in adults  and children.  Overweight  and obesity  contributes  to a growing  prevalence 
of long-term  conditions  such  as diabetes  and cardiovascular  disease,  reduced  quality  of life 
and increased  mortality . 
22.28  Wyre Forest  District  has a higher  rate of excess  weight  amongst  reception  class  children 
compared  to the Worcestershire  and England  average.  In Reception  year (age 4/5 years)  24.2% 
of the children  living  in Wyre Forest  were  overweight  (including  obese)  and by Year 6 (age 
10/11 years)  this increases  to 36.2%  (2018/19)  (40). This prevalence  also tends  to be higher 
within  areas  characterised  with high levels  of socioeconomic  deprivation  (41). Local  evidence  in 
Worcestershire  highlights  that exposure  to at least  one fast food outlet  within  1 mile of home 
and within  1 mile of school  were  both associated  with a higher  proportion  of children  becoming 
obese.  This was most  pronounced   in the proportion  who were  overweight  in reception  and 
became  obese  by year 6. Local  research  in Worcestershire  using  2016/17  National  Child 
Measurement  Programme  (NCMP)  data showed  that at  baseline  (42) the prevalence  of obesity 
in children  who were  exposed  to fast food outlets  from the home  was less than 2% higher  than 
38 The food or any part of it is hot, if it is at a temperature  that is above  the ambient  air temperature,  at the time that it's 
provided  to the customer  (the precondition)  and one or more  of the following  tests are satisfied  i) It's provided  to a customer 
in packaging  that retains  heat (whether  or not the packaging  was primarily  designed  for that purpose)  or in any other 
packaging  that is specifically  designed  for hot food;  ii) It's been  kept hot after being  heated;  iii) It's been  heated  to order; 
iv) It's been  heated  for the purposes  of enabling  it to be consumed  hot. 
39 Source  LGA 2016  Tipping  the scales  case  studies  on the use of planning  powers  to limit hot food takeaways. 
40 Public  Health  Outcomes  Framework.  Available  at: 
https://fingertips.phe.org.uk/profile/public-health-outcomes-framework/data#page/0/gid/1000042/pat/6/par/E1200 
0005/ati/201/are/E07000239 
41 In reception,  for children  without  a fast food outlet  within  1 mile of school.  6.43%  obese,  and 8.81%  obese  if exposed.  In 
year 6, for children  without  a fast food outlet  within  1 mile of school.  11.4%  obese,  and 19.4%  obese  if exposed. 
42 In reception,  for children  without  a fast food outlet  within  1 mile of school  6.43%  obese  and 8.81%  obese  if exposed.  In 
year 6, for children  without  a fast food outlet  within  1 mile of school  11.4%  obese  and 19.4%  obese  if exposed.   
     Variable  Weight Category in Reception (2010/11)  
Under weight  Healthy 
Weight  Overweight  Obese  
Exposure to 
Fast Food 
Outlets 
(FFOs) from 
school  None  1 263 56 22 
 (0.29)  (76.9 ) (16.4 ) (6.43 ) 
>1 13 1800  362 210 
 (0.55 )     (75.5 ) (15.2)  (8.81 ) 
 
 
 Variable  Weight Category in Year 6 (2016/17)  
Under weight  Healthy 
Weight  Overweight  Obese  
Exposure to 
Fast Food 
Outlets 
(FFOs) from 
school  None  7 242 54 39 
 (2.05 ) (70.8 ) (15.8 ) (11.4 ) 
>1 29 1553  341 462 
 (1.22 ) (65.1 ) (14.3 ) (19.4 ) 
  
Wyre Forest  District 
159 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 22 Town Centre  Development  and Retail those  not exposed.  By year 6 this gap had increased  to over 5%. Similarly , the prevalence  of 
obesity  for those  who were  exposed  from school  was less than 2% in reception  and increased 
to 8% by year 6. 
22.29  Wyre Forest  District  Council  considers  that the location  of hot food takeaways  in close 
proximity  to schools  could  lead to children  consuming  a greater  amount  of unhealthy  food which 
would  undermine  initiatives  to promote  healthier  diets,  particularly  in schools.  The proliferation 
and proximity  of hot food takeaways  to schools  is also of concern  as the food they serve  is 
mostly  high in fat, salt and sugar . Healthier  options,  if available,  are generally  very limited.  There 
is concern  that the effect of fast food consumption  on children’ s diets  and eating  behaviour  can 
add to health  problems  related  to obesity . A proliferation  of hot food takeaways  within  walking 
distance  of locations  where  children  and young  people  congregate,  including  schools,  youth 
centres  and parks  can be seen  as a contributing  factor  to rising  levels  of childhood  obesity . 
22.30   400 metres  distance  is equivalent  to a 10 minute  walk and is considered  sufficient  to 
deter  school  children  from walking  to takeaways  during  their lunch  break  or after school.  (43)(44) 
22.31  Policy  DM.18  will be further  expanded  by the preparation  of a Supplementary  Planning 
Document  (SPD)  relating  to Health  (as per Policy  SP.16).  
43 Source  NHS  Healthy  Urban  Development. 
44 For the purpose  of Policy  DM.18,  400 metres  will be measured  as the 'crow  flies' 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 160 Town Centre  Development  and Retail 22 23.1 Wyre Forest  District  Council  recognises  the importance  of tourism  and the contribution 
it can make  to the local economy . It supports  rural tourism  and leisure  developments  that respect 
the character  of the countryside  in conformity  with NPPF  paragraph  84. It also aims  to protect 
the environmental  quality  of the area.  Visitors  to Wyre Forest  District  were  surveyed  as part of 
the Wyre Forest  District  Visitor  Survey  2015/2016,  approximately  79% of those  surveyed  were 
day visitors.   The remainder  were  made  up of 13% overnight  visitors  and 7% visiting  the District 
as part of a holiday  but not staying  within  the District.  Opportunities  to encourage  visitors  to 
stay overnight  or longer  as well as facilities  for all weathers,  and encouraging  visitors  throughout 
the year will be encouraged.  Policies  within  this chapter  should  be read in conjunction  with 
Policy  SP.19 which  is the strategic  policy  Sustainable  Tourism. 
23.2 Tourism  is an extremely  important  sector  of the UK's economy . Within  the Wyre Forest 
District,  approximately  6.2%  of jobs are related  to the tourism  industry . This figure  is below  the 
national  average  of 9.5%.  Between  2009  and 2014  employment  in tourism  industries  in the UK 
increased  from 2.66 million  to 2.97 million.  The majority  of tourism  workers  are permanent 
(89.57%)  and the percentage  of the workforce  employed  in the tourism  industry  has increased 
from 8.29%  (2.50  million  2008)  to 9.46%  (2.97  million  2014)  an increase  of 18.78%  over 6 years. 
Employment  in the tourist  industry  is extremely  important  for younger  workers  with 26.4%  of 
those  aged  between  the ages  of 16-24  being  employed  in the industry  compared  to only 10.5% 
in non tourist  industries  (Office for National  Statistics  – data from Annual  Population  survey 
2008-2014  ONS).  The income  from tourism  can help support  the retention  of existing  services 
and facilities  such  as shops,  public  houses  and restaurants. 
23.3 It is therefore  important  that future  planning  policy  protects  and enhances  this aspect  of 
the economy . Planning  can have  a significant  impact  on the tourism  sector ’s ability  to grow  in 
response  to future  demand  and to protect  the natural  and historic  assets  on which  the industry 
is based.  Within  the District  we need  to provide  adequate  opportunities  for growth,  but also 
policies  should  be strong  enough  to prevent  inappropriate  development  that would  limit tourism 
potential  and cause  an adverse  impact  on the District. 
Wyre Forest  District 
161 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 23 Sustainable  Tourism Policy  DM.19  - Supporting  Major  Tourist  Attractions 
Severn  Valley  Railway  (SVR) 
Proposals  that enhance  the role and function  of the SVR (including  visitor  attractions  and 
facilities  and maintenance  facilities  subject  to their impact  on the surrounding  landscape, 
biodiversity , heritage  assets  and the Green  Belt) will be supported.  Proposals  to link the 
SVR with other  sites along  the route  will be encouraged,  especially  at West Midland  Safari 
and Leisure  Park. 
West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park  (WMSLP) 
The Council  will consider  favourably  applications  for major  development  at West Midland 
Safari  and Leisure  Park that are contained  in the WMSLP  masterplan  or any other  similar 
agreed  document,  where  such  development  would: 
a. Upgrade  and improve  the viability  of the attraction; 
b. Address  the potential  for heathland  restoration  and recreation; 
c. Be appropriate  to its function  as a major  tourism  destination; 
d. Make  a positive  contribution  to the local economy;  and 
e. Be acceptable  taking  into account  the masterplan  and its location  within  the Green 
Belt and the need  to ensure  compatibility  with the local infrastructure  network. 
The Wyre Forest 
Future  development  proposals  that enhance  the tourism  and leisure  role of the Wyre Forest 
will be supported.  Proposals  will need  to ensure  that they respect  the landscape,  biodiversity 
and historic  environment  of this ancient  woodland.  Proposals  that cause  adverse  impact 
to the area will not be permitted.  Development  proposals  that link to the Forest,  but are not 
necessarily  within  the Forest  boundaries  will also be supported,  subject  to proposals 
conforming  to other  policies  within  the plan and Natural  England  guidance  on ancient 
woodland  and veteran  trees. 
Arboreta 
There  are two large  arboreta  located  within  the District  at Upper  Arley  and Wolverley 
(Bodenham).  Development  proposals  that enhance  the tourism  and leisure  role of these 
areas  will be supported.  Proposals  will need  to ensure  that they respect  the landscape, 
biodiversity  and historic  environment  of these  areas  and proposals  that cause  adverse 
impact  on the environment  will not be permitted. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 162 Sustainable  Tourism 23 Reasoned  Justification 
23.4 Wyre Forest  District  Council  is committed  to ensuring  that the District's  appeal  as a 
tourist  destination  is retained  and enhanced  throughout  the plan period.  It is therefore  important 
to provide  support  for tourist  proposals  by either  the expansion  of existing  development  or new 
developments. 
23.5 Nationally , tourism  is generally  an expanding  part of the economy . However , locally 
there  was a slight  downturn  in 2014  when  both bed nights  and expenditure  were  down  4%. It 
is estimated  that within  Wyre Forest  District  the number  employed  in tourism  is around  2,155 
and £121  million  is spent  in the local area as a result  of tourism,  taking  into account  multiplier 
effects.  (Economic  Impact  of Tourism,  Wyre Forest  2015) 
Severn  Valley  Railway 
23.6 The Severn  Valley Railway  (SVR)  is a heritage  railway  line running  steam  trains  between 
Kidderminster  and Bridgnorth  (in Shropshire),  a distance  of 16 miles.  The railway  is not currently 
a commercial  line but provides  a genuine  draw  for visitors  and enthusiasts  alike.  The potential 
exists  to open  the line to commercial  services  in the future.  The route  of the railway  closely 
follows  the course  of the River  Severn  for most  of its journey . Kidderminster  Railway  Museum 
houses  a vast range  of railway  artefacts,  most  of which  date back  to the days  of steam  travel. 
23.7 The route  is now a major  national  and international  tourist  attraction.  During  2016  over 
250,000  passengers  travelled  on SVR (source  SVR website).  Given  the SVR's  potential  impact 
on the District,  it is considered  important  to provide  a flexible  policy  framework  that safeguards 
the existing  railway  operations  whilst  providing  support  for additional  development  proposals. 
23.8 The line of the SVR runs through  the District  and therefore  support  will be given  to 
proposals  to link this route  with other  sites that lie adjacent  to the tracks  where  additional  benefit 
in terms  of sustainable  transport  and improving  the tourism  offer can be realised.  The SVR is 
a key attraction  for tourists  and provides  an undeniable  economic  draw  into the District.  The 
continued  support  for operations  along  the railway  is provided  within  this policy , recognising 
the important  role that the railway  provides  as both a defining  feature  of the landscape  and the 
economic  impact  that it brings. 
West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park  (WMSLP) 
23.9 WMSLP  is one of the largest  tourist  attractions  in Worcestershire,  and has been  in 
operation  for over 35 years.  As well as the major  Safari  Park,  it contains  one of the UK's leading 
and longest  established  inland  amusement  parks,  with over 30 rides  catering  for the family 
market,  and is also a major  events  venue.  The safari  park and leisure  park attracts  750,000 
visitors  a year and employs  82 year round  staff plus a further  395 seasonal  staff. The company 
spends  several  million  pounds  each  year with local and regional  suppliers.  Its payroll  is a 
substantial,  multi-million  pound  sum which  goes  directly  to the local economy  as WMSLP 
primarily  recruits  from the local area. 
23.10  In order  to understand  more  fully the impact  that the WMSLP  has on the District,  a 
study  was carried  out by Amion  Consulting  in 2011 which  focussed  on the potential  economic 
impact  of the Park.  The study  looked  at how proposed  redevelopment  at the Park would  impact 
Wyre Forest  District 
163 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 23 Sustainable  Tourism on the local economy . The conclusions  of the study  were  that proposed  improvements  to the 
Park would  help to drive  the development  of the visitor  economy , enable  business  growth  and 
create  new employment  opportunities,  as well as building  on an existing  local asset.  The study 
identified  that redevelopment  at the Park has the potential  to generate  significant  net additional 
local jobs and economic  activity . 
23.11 The WMSLP  undoubtedly  has a large  impact  on the economy  of the District,  with the 
potential  for this impact  to grow  further . However , future  expansion  or redevelopment  of the 
Park is constrained  by the Green  Belt designation.  The site is therefore  identified  as a Previously 
Developed  Site in the Green  Belt (Policy  SP.21). 
23.12  There  are competing  priorities  in planning  policy  terms  within  this location  and the 
Council  is seeking  to achieve  a balanced  approach  which  maintains  the identity  of Bewdley 
along  with the essence  of the Green  Belt whist  providing  some  flexibility  to enable  one of the 
District’ s key tourist  attractions  and employers  to develop  in a sustainable  and appropriate 
manner . Unless  the Park can continue  to introduce  new attractions  and complementary 
development,  the Park's  contribution  to the local economy  will be restricted. 
23.13  In recognition  of the valuable  role which  WMSLP  plays  in the region's  tourism  industry , 
and to help secure  its long term future  as a major  tourist  attraction,  the Council  will support  the 
ongoing  enhancement  and improvement  of the WMSLP  as a major  tourism  destination,  subject 
to other  policies  being  adhered  to (including  Green  Belt policies). 
The Wyre Forest 
23.14  This ancient  woodland  is a major  attraction  for tourists  and residents  of the District 
alike.  Situated  to the west of the District,  the Forest  offers visitors  a range  of woodland  walks 
and trails  amongst  beautiful  ancient  oak woodland  and conifer  plantation  together  with an 
arboretum  in the forest  close  to the 'Whitty  Pear'.  The forest  now stretches  to approximately 
6,000  acres  (although  not all of this lies within  Wyre Forest  District).  It is one of the largest 
remaining  ancient  woodlands  in Britain  and much  of the area is designated  as a Site of Special 
Scientific  Interest  (SSSI)  with many  rare species  of flora and fauna  being  found  there. 
23.15  The Forest  includes  a visitor  centre  and a recently  developed  Community  Discovery 
Centre,  providing  a magnet  for visitors  to the Forest.  A high wire course  within  the Forest,  run 
by Go Ape, is situated  near to the visitor  centre.  These  facilities  provide  an important  tourism 
offer and enable  people  to enjoy  this ancient  woodland.  The Forest  also helps  to improve  the 
health  and wellbeing  of the District's  population  by offering  walks  and trails to support  all abilities. 
23.16  Natural  England  have  produced  guidance  on ancient  woodland 
https://www .gov.uk/guidance/ancient-woodland-and-veteran-trees-protection-surveys-licences Therefore, 
it is of vital importance  to the future  development  of the attraction  and the area as a whole,  that 
any proposals  respect  the special  characteristics  of the area and do not cause  harm  to the main 
reason  that people  visit the area in the first place,  the enjoyment  of the Forest  itself. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 164 Sustainable  Tourism 23 Arboreta 
23.17  The District  has two large  Arboreta  that perform  a tourism  function,  as well as being 
important  natural  habitats.  Arley  Arboretum  boasts  more  than 300 species  of trees  in formal 
and informal  plantings  and gardens.  Bodenham  Arboretum  contains  3,000  species  of trees  and 
shrubs  from all over the world  and its 156 acres  contains  mature  woodland,  specimen  trees 
and shrubs  and two acres  of pools  and lakes.  The continued  operation  of these  tourist  attractions 
may require  future  development  proposals  to come  forward.  Therefore,  the policy  framework 
allows  for development  to be considered,  subject  to the proposals  not causing  an adverse 
impact  on the environment,  which  is the main  draw  for tourists. 
Policy  DM.20  - Supporting  Tourist  Attractions 
Proposals  for the development  of other  tourism  related  developments  within  Wyre Forest 
District  will be permitted  where  the following  criteria  have  been  met: 
a. The development  is compatible  with the surrounding  area and Green  Belt policies 
together  with other  policies  within  the Plan. 
b. Provision  should  be made  for suitable  access  and car parking,  including  where 
appropriate  coach  parking,  and where  possible  be served  by public  transport,  walking 
and cycling  routes. 
c. Heritage  assets  and their setting  should  be conserved  and, where  appropriate, 
enhanced  to encourage  heritage  tourism  within  the District. 
d. The natural  environment  and landscape  should  be enhanced  and safeguarded. 
23.18  Reasoned  Justification 
23.19  Wyre Forest  District  provides  a wide range  of visitor  attractions  encompassing  both 
the natural  and the built environment.  Tourism  supports  the economic  viability  and vitality  of 
local businesses  and provides  uses  for historic  buildings. 
23.20  Visitor  attractions  can range  from the main  tourist  attractions  which  were  explored 
earlier  in this chapter  to other  attractions  such  as Kidderminster  Harriers,  Bewdley  Museum 
which  attracts  200,000  visitors  per annum,  the Rivers  Severn  and Stour  together  with Stourport 
Riverside,  the Worcestershire  and Staffordshire  Canal,  Harvington  Hall, Kidderminster  Carpet 
Museum  as well as various  festivals. 
23.21  Access  to attractions  within  the District  should  be as accessible  to as many  visitors  as 
possible  by public  transport,  walking  and cycling  routes  and parking  facilities.  Currently  there 
are few suitable  coach  parking  areas.  Additional  suitable  coach  parking  areas  may encourage 
additional  visitors  to attractions. 
Wyre Forest  District 
165 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 23 Sustainable  Tourism 23.22   Within  the District  there  are also 13 parks  and gardens  and 26 sites of natural  and 
semi  natural  space.  Around  6% of the District's  land area is designated  as Sites  of Special 
Scientific  Interest  (SSSI)  the Wyre Forest  itself being  the largest,  others  include  Hurcott  Pool 
and Woods  and Puxton  Marsh.  The District  also has Local  Wildlife  Sites  and Local  Nature 
Reserves  (LNRs)  which  include  Habberley  Valley and Redstone  Marsh.  There  are also a number 
of formal  parks  in the District  which  host events  including  Brinton  Park.  The policy  supports 
proposals  that are compatible  with the character  of the area. 
Tourist  and business  visitor  accommodation 
23.23  Hotels,  bed and breakfast  and self catering  accommodation  make  a particular 
contribution  to the tourist  industry  in the District  as they are an important  element  in the stock 
of tourist  accommodation.  In order  for the business,  conference  and tourist  market  to grow , the 
District  Council  recognises  the need  for accommodation  to cater  for these  demands,  together 
with adequate  parking. 
23.24  Where  uses  such  as restaurants  and pubs,  are included  in schemes,  their impact  on 
adjacent  settlements  will need  to be assessed. 
Policy  DM.21  - Tourist  Accommodation 
1. Extension  to Existing  Tourist  Accommodation 
a. Proposals  for extensions  to existing  tourist  accommodation  within  settlements 
outside  the Green  Belt will be supported  subject  to their impact  on the built, historic 
and natural  environment. 
b. Proposals  to existing  tourist  accommodation  in the Green  Belt should  be of a scale 
that is not disproportionate  to the size of the original  building  and design  should 
be sympathetic  to the original  building. 
2. Conversion  of Existing  Dwellings  to Tourist  Accommodation 
The conversion  of dwellings  to guest  house  or bed and breakfast  accommodation  will 
be acceptable  subject  to car parking  provision  being  available,  in accordance  with 
adopted  Worcestershire  County  Council  Parking  Standards  and there  being  no undue 
disturbance  to surrounding  neighbours.   
3. Caravan  and Camping  Sites 
a. Applications  for further  new mobile  home  or caravan  sites within  the District's  rural 
areas  will be resisted  due to the collective  impact  which  the existing  sites have  on 
the landscape  (also  see Policy  DM.30). 
b. Proposals  for extensions  and improvements  to existing  sites will be considered 
on their individual  merits. 
4. Grass  Pitch  Sites 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 166 Sustainable  Tourism 23 Grass  pitch  sites designated  for camping  for recreation/holiday  uses  without  new built 
facilities  will be encouraged  where  the proposal  does  not conflict  with any other  policies. 
Grass  pitch campsites  will be encouraged  to reuse  existing  buildings  to provide  facilities.   
5. New Accommodation 
Proposals  for new visitor  accommodation  will only be supported   for: 
a. New hotels  within  settlements  outside  the Green  Belt subject  to their impact  on the 
built,  historic  and natural  environment; 
b. New accommodation  on brownfield  sites.  For any applications  on greenfield  sites,  the 
Local  Planning  Authority  will require  supporting  information  demonstrating  that all 
potential  brownfield  sites have  been  thoroughly  investigated  and why they are 
inappropriate  for the development  proposed; 
c. Conversion  of large  country  houses  to hotel  or self catering  use where  it is demonstrated 
that proposals  are fully in accordance  with relevant  policies  of this plan,  in particular 
where  it is demonstrated  that proposals  are: 
i. Of a type and scale  that is appropriate  for its location  with no adverse  impact  on 
neighbouring  amenity; 
ii. Provided  as part of a farm diversification  scheme  or ancillary  development  to an 
existing  hotel,  guest  house,  public  house,  restaurant  or other  similar  establishment. 
d. The re-use  of redundant  rural buildings  of permanent  and substantial  construction 
proposals  must  also comply  with Policy  DM.29  Reuse  and adaptation  of rural buildings. 
e. To protect  the high quality  landscape  of the District,  proposals  for new build  hotels  will 
not be permitted  in the Green  Belt. 
Reasoned  Justification 
23.25  Visitor  accommodation  can take a wide variety  of forms,  including  hotels,  bed and 
breakfast,  guest  houses,  self catering  and group  accommodation  such  as youth  hostels.  A 
significant  proportion  of the money  that visitors  spend  is on accommodation  and therefore  it is 
important  to retain  existing  accommodation  and secure  the provision  of new visitor 
accommodation  to support  tourism  in the Wyre Forest  District.  By encouraging  the development 
of visitor  accommodation  in built-up  areas,  the environmental  impact  of building  in the open 
countryside  can be minimised.  In the open  countryside  reuse  of existing  buildings  will help to 
minimise  the visual  impact. 
23.26  Sites  within  settlements  are more  appropriate  as they already  have  access  to the 
infrastructure,  amenities  and public  transport  links and cycling  and walking  infrastructure  needed 
to support  them.  The NPPF  requires  Local  Authorities  to support  tourism  in rural areas  and the 
countryside.  It is important  that any tourist  accommodation  does  not compromise  the amenity 
of surrounding  local residents  and is suitable  in its surroundings. 
Wyre Forest  District 
167 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 23 Sustainable  Tourism 23.27  Camping  sites can encourage  tourism  which  helps  the local economy , they also provide 
a wider  range  of holiday  accommodation.  Camping  sites provide  the facilities  for overnight 
visitors  who may then visit the many  attractions  that the District  has to offer. However , hard 
standing  sites for touring  caravans  and motor  homes  can have  a detrimental  impact  on the 
landscape. 
Waterway  Policies 
23.28  The River  Severn  plays  a key role in attracting  visitors  to Bewdley  and 
Stourport-on-Severn  whereas  the potential  of the River  Stour  and the Staffordshire  and 
Worcestershire  Canal  has yet to be fully exploited  (other  than in the Stourport  Basins  which 
has benefitted  from a major  restoration  scheme).   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 168 Sustainable  Tourism 23 Policy  DM.22  - Safeguarding  the Green  Belt 
Within  the Green  Belt (as defined  on the Policies  Map),  development  will not be permitted, 
except  in very special  circumstances,  or unless  one of the following  applies: 
a. There  is a clear  need  demonstrated  for new buildings  for the purposes  of agriculture 
or forestry . 
b. Provision  of appropriate  facilities  (both  for existing  use of land or a change  of use) for 
outdoor  sport,  outdoor  recreation,  cemeteries  and burial  grounds  and allotments,  as 
long as the facilities  preserve  the openness  of the Green  Belt and do not conflict  with 
the purposes  of including  land within  it. 
c. The replacement  of a building,  provided  the new building  is in the same  use and not 
materially  larger  than the one it replaces. 
d. The development  involves  the re-use  or conversion  of buildings  in accordance  with 
the policies  for the re-use  and adaptation  of Rural  Buildings  (especially  Policies  SP.11 
(dwellings)  and DM.10  (employment)). 
e. The proposals  involve  the limited  infilling  or redevelopment  of an identified  Previously 
Developed  Site in the Green  Belt, in accordance  with the site specific  policies  contained 
in Policy  SA.PDL. 
f. The proposals  are part of a Community  Right  to Build  Order  or a Neighbourhood 
Development  Order . 
g. Other  operations,  including  changes  of use which  preserve  the openness  of the Green 
Belt and do not conflict  with the purposes  of including  land within  it. 
In addition,  development  of housing  in the Green  Belt will not be permitted  unless  one of 
the following  circumstances  applies: 
i. There  is a proven  need  in association  with the purposes  of agriculture  or forestry . 
ii. It is for affordable  housing,  reserved  for local community  needs  in accordance  with 
Addressing  Rural  Housing  Needs  (Policy  SP.11). 
iii. It is for the extension  of an existing  dwelling,  provided  that it does  not result  in 
disproportionate  additions  over and above  the size of the original  dwelling. 
iv. Limited  infilling  in villages 
Proposals  within,  or conspicuous  from the Green  Belt, must  not be detrimental  to the visual 
amenity  of the Green  Belt, by virtue  of their siting,  materials  or design. 
Wyre Forest  District 
169 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 24 Safeguarding  the Green  Belt Reasoned  Justification 
24.1 Over  half of the District's  land area is covered  by the West Midlands  Green  Belt 
designation.  The NPPF  sets out the purposes  of including  land within  the Green  Belt and includes 
information  on the types  of development  that are considered  to be appropriate  within  the Green 
Belt. Chapter  6 of this document  describes  the necessary  review  of the Wyre Forest  Green  Belt. 
Policy  DM.22  sets out detailed  local guidance  on development  within  the Green  Belt. 
24.2 The essential  characteristic  of Green  Belts  is their openness  and their permanence,  and 
their protection  must  be maintained  as far as can be seen  ahead.  The fundamental  aim of Green 
Belt policy  is to prevent  urban  sprawl  by keeping  land permanently  open.  Green  Belts  help to 
protect  the countryside,  and can assist  in moving  towards  more  sustainable  patterns  of urban 
development.  The inclusion  of land in Green  Belts  is of paramount  importance  to their continued 
protection  and it is important  that the visual  amenities  of the Green  Belt are not damaged  by 
proposals  for development  within,  or conspicuous  from,  the Green  Belt. 
24.3 It is nationally  recognised  that outdoor  sport  is one of the uses  of land which  can be 
appropriate  within  the Green  Belt. Within  the District's  Green  Belt, there  is a concentration  of 
outdoor  sports  facilities  on the Minster  Road  between  Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn. 
Because  Green  Belt areas,  by their nature,  are located  close  to towns,  they can play a valuable 
role in opening  up access  to the open  countryside  for urban  populations. 
24.4 The District  Council  has identified  a small  number  of Previously  Developed  Sites  within 
the Green  Belt on the Policies  Map.  The policy  framework  for further  development  at these  sites 
or for their redevelopment  is set out within  the NPPF  at paragraph  145(g).  Further  site specific 
policies  for each  of these  "Previously  Developed  Sites"  are set out within  Policy  SA.PDL  Part 
C of this document. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 170 Safeguarding  the Green  Belt 24 Policy  DM.23  - Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment 
1. Proposals  likely  to affect the significance  of a heritage  asset  (including  the contribution 
made  by its setting  or any important  vistas  or views)  should  be accompanied  by a 
description  of its significance  in sufficient  detail  to allow  the potential  impacts  to be 
adequately  assessed  by a qualified  and/or  experienced  heritage  professional.  This will 
usually  be in the form of a Heritage  Statement.  Where  there  is potential  for heritage 
assets  with archaeological  interest  to be affected,  this description  should  be informed 
by available  evidence,  desk-based  assessment  and, where  appropriate,  field evaluation 
to establish  the significance  of known  or potential  heritage  assets. 
2. Any development  proposal  causing  harm  or loss of significance  to a heritage  asset  will 
be resisted  unless  clear  and convincing  justification  is provided,  to permit  assessment 
against  the NPPF  criteria,  relevant  legislation  and published  local and national  guidance. 
3.  Development  proposals  should  avoid  harm  to or loss of heritage  assets  wherever 
possible.  The highest  level of harm  should  require  very robust  justification,  including 
the demonstrable  consideration  of alternatives.  Substantial  harm  to a designated 
heritage  asset  should  only be allowed  in exceptional  circumstances. 
4. The sympathetic  and creative  reuse  and adaptation  of historic  buildings  will be 
encouraged.  Such  proposals  that provide  a sustainable  future  for heritage  assets 
identified  as at risk, will be considered  in accordance  with  Policy  DM.24. 
5. Repairs,  alterations,  extensions  and conversions  of heritage  assets  must  be 
sympathetically  designed  to respect  the significance  of the form,  character  and materials 
of the original  heritage  asset  and its setting.  Fixtures  and fittings  should  be 
inconspicuously  sited  and proportioned  and be designed  sympathetically  to reflect  the 
significance  of the asset 
6. Where  a material  change  to a heritage  asset  has been  agreed,  recording  and 
interpretation  should  be undertaken  to document  and understand  the asset’ s 
archaeological,  architectural,  artistic  or historic  significance.  The scope  of the recording 
should  be proportionate  to the asset’ s significance  and the impact  of the development 
on the asset.  The information  and understanding  gained  should  be made  publicly 
available,  as a minimum  through  the relevant  Historic  Environment  Record  and where 
appropriate  at the asset  itself through  on-site  interpretation. 
Reasoned  Justification 
25.1 The various  elements  of the historic  environment  contribute  to making  Wyre Forest 
District  a desirable  place  to live, work  and attract  tourism  and economic  investment  to the 
area.  Conservation  of heritage  assets  must  reflect  a sufficient  understanding  of their significance, 
including  both their setting  and their wider  context  in the landscape/townscape.  It is recognised 
that many  heritage  assets,  in particular  archaeological  remains,  are currently  unidentified  and 
thus their significance  is unknown.  Appropriate  information,  where  necessary  from a field 
evaluation  of significance,  is the key to well-informed  decision-making. 
Wyre Forest  District 
171 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 25 Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment 25.2 Local  heritage  listing  is a means  for a community  and a local authority  to jointly  identify 
heritage  assets  that are valued  as distinctive  elements  of the local historic  environment.  The 
Local  Heritage  List identifies  those  heritage  assets  that are not protected  by statutory 
designations.  A Local  Heritage  List provides  clarity  on the location  of these  assets  and what  is 
significant  about  them.  Their  local interest  could  be related  to the social  and economic  history 
of the area,  individuals  of local importance,  settlement  patterns  or the age, design  and style of 
buildings.  The Local  Heritage  List is not restricted  to buildings.  It may comprise  sites,  places  or 
areas  such  as village  greens  or ponds.  It may include  structures  such  as bridges  and sluices, 
and historic  street  furniture  such  as letter  boxes,  signposts  or telephone  boxes.  Local  Heritage 
Assets  are not given  any protection  through  Law, but the use of appropriate  materials  and 
design  is encouraged  in schemes  for their alteration.  Repairs  should  be undertaken  on a 
like-for-like  basis.  The District  Council  will continue  to compile  and maintain  its Local  Heritage 
List for those  undesignated  heritage  assets  it considers  to be of local interest  and significance. 
25.3 Pre-application  discussions  are encouraged,  as this will allow  the early  identification  of 
heritage  issues,  save  time,  reduce  risk and improve  the quality  of applications  and thereby 
encourage  investment  in the District.  These  discussions  should  involve  the relevant  local planning 
authority , applicants,  architects  and agents  and heritage  specialists  and Parish  or Town Councils 
working  on Neighbourhood  Plans.  Proposals  involving  new build,  repair , alteration  or extension 
of heritage  assets  can conserve  the significance  of the existing  asset  and its setting.  This may 
be achieved  by means  of appropriate  siting,  massing,  form,  height,  scale,  design  and use of 
local materials. 
25.4 The use of local building  materials  or the sourcing  of building  materials  compatible  with 
those  used  historically  but no longer  available  (such  as stone  from local quarries  which  have 
closed)  is of great  importance  in maintaining  the character  of the built historic  environment.  The 
Building  Stones  Database  produced  by the Herefordshire  and Worcestershire  Earth  Heritage 
Trust provides  data on the origins  of building  stone  used  in local buildings  and the District  Council 
will use evidence  contained  within  this database  to inform  its decision  making. 
25.5 The sympathetic  reuse,  repair  and adaptation  of existing  buildings  can act as a catalyst 
for economic  regeneration,  support  tourism  and encourage  the sustainable  use of resources.   
It is important  that any climate  change  mitigation  / adaptation  measures  do not cause  harm  to 
the significance  of heritage  assets.  Where  appropriate,  when  opportunities  for creative, 
contemporary  and innovative  architectural  design  arise,  they will be encouraged. 
25.6 In having  regard  for the provisions  of the NPPF , the total loss of any heritage  asset  either 
by demolition  or development  will be resisted  unless  all reasonable  efforts have  been  made  to 
sustain  existing  uses,  find viable  new uses  for the asset,  or otherwise  preserve  it in charitable 
or community  ownership.  When  considering  development  proposals  of substantial  benefit  to 
the community  and warranting  consideration  of total loss of a heritage  asset,  the District  Council 
will require  clear  evidence  that the redevelopment  will proceed. 
25.7 The District  Council  will from time to time identify  and designate  Conservation  Areas 
where  it considers  those  Areas  to have  special  character  warranting  protection  under  Policy 
DM.23.  Alongside  relevant  policies  and guidance  regard  should  be had to the provisions  of 
relevant  legislation,  including  the Planning  (Listed  Building  and Conservation  Areas)  Act 1990. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 172 Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment 25 Policy  DM.24  Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 
1. All development  will be expected  to be of a high design  quality . It will need  to integrate 
effectively  with its surroundings,  in terms  of form and function,  reinforce  local 
distinctiveness   and conserve,  and where  appropriate,  enhance  cultural  and heritage 
assets,  landmarks  and their settings.  New and innovative  designs  which  promote  high 
levels  of inclusivity  and sustainability  will be encouraged  and supported  where  they 
enhance  the overall  quality  of the built environment. 
2. Applications  should  demonstrate,  through  a Design  and Access  Statement  or other 
supporting  evidence,  how the objectives  outlined  in criterion  1 have  been  addressed. 
They  will also need  to address  the following  matters: 
a. Siting  and layout 
The siting  and layout  of a development  should  reflect  the given  characteristics  of the 
site in terms  of its appearance  and function.  Orientation  should  take advantage  of 
passive  heating  and cooling  systems,  offer shade  as appropriate  and provide  for the 
use of renewable  energy . 
b. Relationship  to Surroundings  and to Other  Development 
Development  proposals  must  complement  the character  of the area.  In particular , 
development  should  respond  to surrounding  buildings  and the distinctive  features  or 
qualities  that contribute  to the visual  and heritage  interest  of the townscape,  frontages, 
streets  and landscape  quality  of the local area,  and should  integrate  well into the 
existing  streetscene.  Development  should  concentrate  the most  active  uses  or 
entrances  on main  thoroughfares  and focal  points,  maximising  the use of corner  plots 
and the street  frontage,  and have  appropriate  regard  to the common  building  line, 
historic  street  pattern  and skyline. 
c. Neighbouring  Amenity 
Development  should  provide  an adequate  level of privacy , outlook,  sunlight  and 
daylight,  and should  not be unduly  overbearing. 
d. Settlement  Character 
The distinct  identity  and character  of settlements  should  be safeguarded  and proposals 
should  be consistent  with the relevant  Conservation  Area  Character  Appraisal  or 
Neighbourhood  Plan.  Design  proposals  should  ensure  that the prominent  views,  vistas 
and skylines  of Bewdley , Stourport-on-Severn,  Kidderminster  and the  village 
Wyre Forest  District 
173 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness settlements   are maintained  and safeguarded,  particularly  where  they relate  to heritage 
assets,  existing  landmark  buildings,  and ‘gateway’  sites.  Development  at the urban 
edges  should  respect  the rural setting. 
e. Mix of Uses 
To create  vitality  and interest,  proposals  should  incorporate  a mix of uses  where  this 
is appropriate  to the location. 
f. Flexible  Design 
Development  should  incorporate  flexible  designs,  addressing  access  to public  open 
spaces  and enabling  adaption  for future  needs  and uses  in terms  of internal  spaces 
and extensions.  It should  avoid  being  prejudicial  to the development  of larger  areas. 
g. Scale,  Height  and Massing 
The scale,  height  and massing  of development  must  be appropriate  to the setting  of 
the site and the surrounding  landscape  character  and townscape,  including  existing 
urban  grain  and density . The footprint  should  be appropriate  for the locality  and not 
represent  over-development  of the site. 
h. Links,  Connectivity  and Access 
Design  and layouts  should  maximise  opportunities  for pedestrian  and cycle  linkages 
to the surrounding  area and local services  and should  be generally  accessible  for all 
users,  including  those  with disabilities.  Vehicular  traffic from the development  should 
be able to access  the highway  safely  and the road network  should  have  the capacity 
to accommodate  the type and volume  of traffic from the development. 
i. Detailed  Design  and Materials 
The detailing  and materials  of development  should  be of high quality  and appropriate 
to its context,  avoiding  inappropriate  features  and detail.  Design  should  have  regard 
to sustainable  construction  approaches  and ensure  adaptability  to changes  in the 
climate. 
j. Appropriate  Facilities 
Development  should  incorporate  the parking  facilities  required  by the current  Parking 
Standards  and provision  for the storage  of bicycles.  Satisfactory  access  and provision 
for the parking,  servicing  and manoeuvring  of vehicles  should  be provided  in 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 174 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 accordance  with the recognised  standards.  Parking  solutions  should  provide  secure 
parking  with adequate  natural  surveillance  without  resulting  in cars dominating  a 
development. 
k. Landscaping 
Development  should  provide  high quality  hard and soft landscaping.  The importance 
of soft landscaping,  using  appropriate  species  and incorporating  arrangements  for 
long-term  management  is emphasised.  Existing  trees  should  be incorporated  into 
development  or replacements  provided  where  a tree survey  demonstrates  trees  are 
not worthy  of retention  or retention  is not possible. 
l. Public  Realm 
Public  realm  and open  spaces  should  be well-designed,  appropriately  detailed  and 
maintained  via management  agreements.  They  should  also incorporate  active  frontages 
where  appropriate.  Proposals  should  include  hard and soft surfaces,  public  art, street 
furniture,  shade,  lighting  and signage  as appropriate  to the development.  Open  space 
and play provision  should  be sited  to take advantage  of natural  surveillance. 
m. Creating  a Safe and Secure  Environment 
Opportunities  for creating  a safe and secure  environment  and providing  surveillance 
should  be included,  principally  through  the layout  and positioning  of buildings,  spaces 
and uses.  Where  appropriate,  development  should  incorporate  measures  for crime 
reduction  that are consistent  with those  recommended  by the Secured  by Design 
guides.  Buildings  and their surrounding  spaces  should  incorporate  fire safety  measures 
and be designed  to allow  rapid  access  by the emergency  services. 
New development  should  be inclusive  and accessible  for all users  including  those  with 
disabilities. 
Reasoned  Justification 
26.1 The NPPF  requires  Local  Planning  Authorities  to prepare  robust  policies  on design. 
Good  design  is a key aspect  of sustainable  development  (NPPF  paragraph  126) and  excellence 
in design  can create  a sense  of place,  improve  the attractiveness  of a location  and create  safer 
places  to live and work,  thereby  enhancing   the quality  of people’ s lives.  Much  detailed  advice 
on design  issues  exists  at the national  level but, given  the importance  of the issue  locally , it is 
considered  essential  to have  a specific  development  management  policy  at the District  level. 
26.2 This policy  is underpinned  by the Council’ s Adopted  Design  Guidance  SPD 2015.  This 
SPD will be updated  following  adoption  of the Local  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
175 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26.3 Good  design  can have  a number  of direct  and indirect  advantages.  Well- designed 
well-connected  places  provide  safe and attractive  pedestrian  environments  and can therefore 
encourage  sustainable  modes  of transport.  Well-designed  buildings  can also incorporate 
sustainable  and climate  change  mitigation  features  which  maximise  natural  heating,  cooling 
and lighting  and provide  opportunities  for the generation  of renewable  energy . 
26.4 Poor  design,  on the other  hand,  has the potential  to detract  from people’ s day-to-day 
lives through  poor building  relationships,  car-dominated  layouts  and a sub-standard  public 
realm,  all of which  add little to a sense  of place  and have  a negative  impact  on land values, 
property  prices  and the environment  in general. 
26.5 The landscapes  and townscapes  of the District  represent  a legacy  of previous 
developments  and they frequently  present  a history  of design  styles.  Whilst  many  aspects  of 
this design  legacy  are pleasing  in terms  of their aesthetics  and function  there  are other  examples 
which   neither  are pleasing  nor continue  to function  well. 
26.6 Mixed  use developments  add to the vitality  and viability  of places.  Residential  properties 
within  town  centres  extend  the length  of time activity  takes  place  and create  natural  surveillance. 
Small  business  units  and retail  outlets  within  primarily  urban  areas  increase  the activity  within 
those  areas  making  places  feel safer . 
26.7 Good  design  is also a crucial  element  in supporting  economic  prosperity , and can be 
an important  factor  in attracting  inward  investment  and promoting  a vibrant  tourist  economy . 
Where  some  employment  development  proposals  require  the accommodation  of specific 
processes,  design  solutions  should  strive  to achieve  a positive  aesthetic  without  compromising 
the functionality  of the development. 
26.8 It is essential  that full consideration  is given  to achieving  sustainable  development  which 
counteracts  anticipated  climatic  variations  over the lifetime  of a new building  or development 
through  the choice  of location,  design  and materials.  It is also important  to address  ecological 
integrity  and there  may be opportunities  for slowing  excess  water  through  the use of green 
infrastructure,  and use of guttering  which  can cope  with higher-intensity  rainfall.  Reducing  the 
demand  for energy  and improving  energy  efficiency  is also an important  starting  point  for 
achieving  sustainable  design.  Further  advice  and guidance  can be sought  from the UK Climate 
Change  Risk Assessment,  which  covers  risks to infrastructure  and the built environment. 
26.9 Good  design  is also vital in protecting  and enhancing  the special  character  of Wyre 
Forest.  The design  principles  contained  within  this policy  provide  a design  framework  for new 
development  that is explained  further  in the Design  Guidance  Supplementary  Planning  Document. 
They  may also be complemented  by Neighbourhood  Plans,  Management  Plans  and Conservation 
Area  Appraisals  that can provide  the ”fine grain”  local design  detail.  In accordance  with the 
NPPF , it is expected  that pre-application  discussions  should  include  design-related  matters. 
26.10  Where  development  proposals  are required  to be accompanied  by a Design  and Access 
Statement,  these  should  be used  to explain  how the principles  of good  design,  including  those 
set out in this policy’ s criteria,  have  been  incorporated  into the development.  This policy  should 
be read in conjunction  with other  relevant  policies  in the WFDP  and proposals  will be expected 
to demonstrate  that they have  been  informed  by current  available  guidance. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 176 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 Policy  DM.25  - Design  of Extensions  and Alterations 
1. Extensions  and alterations,  whether  to residential  or non-residential  properties  should 
not have  a serious  adverse  effect on the amenity  of neighbouring  residents  or occupiers. 
2. Residential  extensions  and alterations  should: 
a. Accord  with the 45 degree  code 
b. Be in scale  and keeping  with the form,  materials,  architectural  characteristics  and 
detailing  of the original  building 
c. Be subservient  to and not cumulatively , when  taken  with previous  extensions, 
overwhelm  the original  building,  which  should  retain  its visual  dominance 
d. Harmonise  with the existing  landscape  or townscape  and not create  incongruous 
features 
e. Not encroach  onto neighbouring  land not owned  by or under  the control  of the 
applicant,  including  highway  pavements  where  properties  are built up to the back 
of pavement 
Unless  it can be demonstrated  that there  is no other  alternative,  the development  of flat 
roofed  extensions  will not be allowed. 
3. Proposals  involving  the extension  or alteration  of an existing  non-residential  building 
should: 
a. Accord  with the 45 degree  code  if located  next to a residential  property . 
b. Harmonise  with the existing  landscape  or townscape  and be complementary  to 
the appearance  of the existing  building. 
c. Not unduly  diminish  the amount  of ancillary  operational  space. 
       
Reasoned  Justification 
26.11 Extensions  to dwellings  constitute  one of the most  frequent  proposals  for development. 
A well-designed  extension  may add to the value  of a property  whereas  unsympathetic  design 
may not only reduce  the value  of the building  but, potentially , its overall  life-span. 
26.12  As a general  rule extensions  should  be subservient  to and reflect  the scale  and character 
of the existing  building.  Extensions,  both in themselves  and when  taken  together  with previous 
works,  should  not dominate  the original  building.  A cumulative  succession  of modest  extensions 
on a building  could  have  a detrimental  impact  on the surrounding  area,  particularly  sensitive 
open  countryside  and Green  Belt. For this reason  extensions  must  be in scale  with the original 
building  rather  than the building  at the time of the application.   
26.13  This policy  is underpinned  by the Council’ s Adopted  Design  Guidance  SPD 2015.  This 
SPD will be updated  following  adoption  of the Local  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
177 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26.14  Most  dwelling  houses  in the District  feature  traditional  pitched  roofs,  and in order  to 
ensure  that two storey  extensions  to such  dwellings  harmonise  in general  design  terms,  the 
use of flat roofs  on such  extensions  will not normally  be permitted. 
26.15  The designers  of extensions  must  consider  the 45 degree  code  in order  to protect  the 
amenity  of neighbouring  residents.  Proposals  that do not adhere  to the code  will not be permitted.   
26.16  Extensions  and alterations  to non-residential  buildings  must  have  regard  to their impacts 
on the visual  integrity  of the building  and local amenity . Such  proposals  should  not seriously 
diminish  the amount  of operational  space  to the detriment  of local amenity  and safety . 
26.17  Where  properties  have  been  constructed  to the back  of the pavement  with no amenity 
space  in front of the elevation  facing  the highway , extensions  or alterations  (including  external 
thermal  cladding)  will technically  fall outside  the curtilage  and will not be permitted  in the interests 
of highway  safety  and maintenance  of utility  services. 
Policy  DM.26  - Landscaping  and Boundary  Treatment 
Landscaping  and Boundary  Treatment 
1. Landscape  Schemes  and Boundary  Treatments  should  be: 
Specific  to the place,  recognise  the context,  reflect  existing  materials  where  these 
contribute  to the character  of the area and be demonstrably  maintainable 
2. Landscape  schemes  must  demonstrate  that they: 
a. Are informed  by  the Landscape  Character  Assessment  and/or  Historic  Landscape 
Characterisation,  protecting  existing  trees,  hedges  and other  landscape  features 
where  possible.    
b. Provide  adequate  room  for growth  and acknowledge  the importance  of existing 
trees,  hedges  and plants  when  specifying  their location 
c. Predominantly  use local native  species  to protect  and improve  biodiversity 
d. Incorporate  features  to clearly  mark  desire  lines,  enhance  or create  views  or vistas, 
and clearly  define  public  and private  spaces 
e. Incorporate  planting  appropriate  to the prevention  of crime  and vandalism 
f. Provide  imaginative,  durable  and porous  hard landscaping  solutions  which  add 
to a sense  of place  and local distinctiveness,  meet  policy  requirements  on water 
management   integrating  SUDS  where  possible 
g. Utilise  lighting  and architectural  features  to give artistic  effect where  appropriate 
to the locality 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 178 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 h. Encourage  walking  and cycling  and provide  direct  routes  to relevant  services 
i. Have  a sustainable  management  plan providing  for maintenance  and aftercare 
3. Boundary  Treatments  must  be designed  to: 
a. Reflect  the local landscape  or urban  character  and appearance  of the area and 
protect  existing  trees,  hedges  or distinct  landscape  features  to protect  and improve 
biodiversity 
b. Reinstate  and include   appropriate  new vegetative  boundaries   wherever  possible 
c. Provide  woodland  planting  where  new development  is proposed  along  transport 
corridors  if this is appropriate  to the existing  landscape  type or natural  habitats 
  
Reasoned  Justification 
26.18  Landscaping  schemes  and boundary  treatments  are an important  aspect  of design. 
When  the topography  of an area or the layout  of the buildings  is taken  into account,  a combination 
of good  design  and landscaping  can dramatically  reduce  the impact  of development. 
26.19  Wyre Forest  District  has a wealth  of native  species  which  should  be utilised  in 
landscaping  schemes  to harmonise  with the character  of the wider  area. 
26.20  Insensitive  landscaping  schemes  can harm  the openness  of the Green  Belt and impact 
on historic  views  of the local towns  and villages. 
26.21  The definition  of public  and private  spaces  is important  to facilitate  future  management 
of landscapes  in both urban  and rural settings.  Landscape  schemes  require  a clear  and 
sustainable  management  plan to ensure  that they do not degenerate  over time into wasteland. 
26.22  The use of certain  plants  (particularly  those  with spikes  or thorns)  can deter  vandals, 
burglars  and other  criminal  activity . Consideration  should  be given  to how sensitive  landscaping 
will contribute  to a reduction  in crime  whilst  being  manageable  and attractive. 
26.23  The integration  of Sustainable  Urban  Drainage  Systems  into hard landscaping  schemes 
can enrich  biodiversity  and ecology  whilst  contributing  to a reduction  in flood  risk See Policy 
SP32. 
26.24  Architectural  and lighting  features  can enhance  and contribute  to an increase  activity 
levels  in and around  landscaping  schemes  which  can make  these  places  better  integrated  into 
an urban  environment. 
Wyre Forest  District 
179 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26.25  It is important  to be able to easily  identify  the boundary  between  public  and private 
spaces.  Walls, fences,  railings,  gates,  archways,  paving  and signage  can all be used  and should 
form an integral  part of the design  solution. 
26.26  Walling  with or without  timber  infill panels,  designed  as an integral  part of the overall 
development  will enhance  a housing  development  over the longer  term,  particularly  when  used 
in association  with well-designed  landscaping.  Timber  fencing  along  boundaries  with the public 
domain  is considered  inappropriate  due to its limited  lifespan  and vulnerability  to damage. 
26.27  The need  for a secure  perimeter  around  industrial,  commercial,  business  and retail 
premises  is recognised,  especially  where  there  are external  storage  areas  or vehicle  depots.  It 
is important,  however , that the choice  of fencing  and screening  can harmonise  well with the 
wider  setting. 
26.28  Where  there  is a requirement  for screening,  this can be designed  as a work  of art and 
this will be encouraged  to mitigate  adverse  impacts  where  appropriate. 
26.29  Landscaping  is an important  element  of design  and should  augment  good  design  rather 
than screening  or hiding  poor design. 
26.30  Landscape  schemes  whether  for residential  or non-residential  properties  should  have 
regards  to the design  principles  set out within  the Council’ s Adopted  Design  Guidance  SPD 
(2015,  and subsequent  revisions). 
Policy  DM.27  - Advertisements 
1. Proposals  for advertisements  must: 
a. Not have  a detrimental  impact  on the amenity  of the area or building  in/on  which 
they are displayed. 
b. Not be prejudicial  to public  safety  by reasons  of their size, location  or content. 
c. Not obstruct  a highway  or public  right of way either  directly  or through  maintenance 
requirements. 
d. Not confuse  users  of highways,  navigable  waterways  and railways. 
2. Proposals  for large  advertisement  hoardings  or groups  of small  hoardings  will only be 
permitted  within  towns  at the following  locations: 
a. Vacant  plots  in large  commercial  or industrial  areas  or to provide  temporary 
screening  of those  areas  whilst  undergoing  development. 
b. Around  sites identified  by the Council  as long-term  eyesores  where  alternative 
screening  will not adequately  enhance  the amenity  of the area. 
3. Proposals  for advertisements  within,  on or adjacent  to heritage  assets  must: 
a. Meet  the criteria  contained  in Policies  SP.21 - Historic  Environment  and DM.23  - 
Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 180 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 b. Reflect  traditional  signage  compatible  with the design  and age of the heritage 
asset. 
c. Avoid the use of internally  illuminated  signage  or box fascias. 
d. Avoid the use of non-traditional  materials  such  as UPVC,  Perspex  and Plastics. 
e. Be in scale  and proportion  to the heritage  asset  on which  they are displayed. 
4. Advance  Warning  Signs  that would  result  in harm  to the amenity  of the townscape  or 
landscape  will not be permitted. 
5. Freestanding  signs,  in addition  to meeting  the criteria  set out in Section  1 above,  must: 
a. Relate  well to the business  of the site. 
b. Not lead to a predominance  of such  signage. 
c. Be sited  within  the forecourt  or curtilage  of the building  to which  they relate 
Reasoned  Justification 
26.31  The display  of advertisements  is subject  to a separate  consent  process  within  the 
planning  system  and is principally  set out in the Town and Country  Planning  (Control  of 
Advertisements)  (England)  Regulations  2007  as amended. 
26.32  In assessing  applications  to display  advertisements  the Planning  Authority  will have 
regard  to the desirability  of preserving  the character  and appearance  of the general  locality  and 
the architectural  quality  or character  of buildings  when  considering  amenity  issues. 
26.33  Illuminated  signage  will only be permitted  where  lighting  is unobtrusive  or not considered 
to be harmful  to the character  and appearance  of the site or surroundings.   When  internal 
illumination  is proposed  individual  illuminated  letters  are preferred. 
26.34  Advertisement  hoardings  may harm  the visual  integrity  of buildings  if they are placed 
without  due regard  for the building’ s design  and fenestration  pattern.  Proposals  for externally 
mounted  advertisement  hoardings  should  demonstrate  that the visual  amenity  of the building 
or area will not be compromised. 
26.35  The maintenance  of public  safety  will be of paramount  concern  when  considering 
applications  for advertisements  adjacent  to railways,  navigable  waterways  and highways. 
26.36  The placing  of an advertisement  on or close  to listed  buildings  is unlikely  to preserve 
their special  interest  and is best avoided.  Proposals  affecting  a Conservation  Area  should 
demonstrate  that its character  will be preserved  or enhanced. 
26.37  Consent  will be granted  for outdoor  advertisements  (including  poster  hoardings)  provided 
the display  will not adversely  affect the amenity  of the area or impact  on public  safety .  Large 
hoardings  in rural areas  are likely  to be out of place  because  of their urbanising  effect. 
Wyre Forest  District 
181 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness Policy  DM.28  - Wyre Forest  Waterways 
1. River  Severn 
Within  the towns  of Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  developments  and initiatives 
that make  a positive  contribution  to the creation  of a high quality  riverside  environment 
will be supported  where  these  do not conflict  or otherwise  harm  the character  of the 
Conservation  Areas  or the wider  landscape. 
2. River  Stour 
The opening  up and enhancement  of the River  Stour  in Kidderminster  town  centre 
will be encouraged.  Within  the towns  of Stourport-on-Severn  and Kidderminster 
developments  and initiatives  that make  a positive  contribution  to the creation  of a high 
quality  riverside  environment  will be supported  where  these  do not conflict  or otherwise 
harm  the character  of the Conservation  Areas  or the wider  landscape. 
3. Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal 
Developments  and initiatives  that make  a positive  contribution  to the creation  of an 
attractive  and high quality  canal-side  environment  will be supported. 
Development  adjacent  to the canal  should,  where  appropriate,  provide  a strong,  active 
frontage  onto the waterside  providing  natural  surveillance  and promoting  high levels 
of activity  during  the day. 
Development  in proximity  to the canal  should  promote  its use as a sustainable  pedestrian 
and cycle  route  with towpath  surfacing  appropriate  to the area through  which  the canal 
passes  and its likely  use. Canal-side  landscaping  should  be appropriate  for the location, 
set back  to allow  for future  growth,  allow  for safe navigation  and feature  robust  barriers  to 
ensure  vehicles  do not enter  the waterway . 
All development  proposals  affecting  the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  Conservation 
Area  (a designated  heritage  asset)  must  comply  with the requirements  of Policy  DM.23 
Safeguarding  the Historic  Environment. 
Reasoned  Justification 
26.38  The District’ s two major  rivers  are fundamental  to the history , heritage  and future  of 
the District.   
River  Severn 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 182 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 26.39  The River  Severn  shaped  the historic  development  of Bewdley  as an inland  river port, 
later overtaken  by Stourport-on-Severn,  Britain’ s first canal  town.  Although  the industrial  role 
of the river has ceased  it remains  an important  dominant  feature  both culturally  and economically . 
26.40  Whilst  the River  Severn  plays  an important  role in attracting  tourism  to both 
Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley , the potential  for tourism  associated  with the River  Stour  and 
the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  in Kidderminster  has yet to be exploited. 
River  Stour 
26.41  The River  Stour , running  north  to south  through  the district  powered  medieval  fulling 
mills and encouraged  iron production  at several  semi-rural  locations.   Running  through  the 
centre  of Kidderminster  it was vital to the rapid  industrial  growth  of the town,  and, at a slightly 
later date,  the industrialisation  of Stourport.  Unlike  the navigable  River  Severn,  the Stour  ran 
through  culverts  in Kidderminster  powering  manufactories  and serving  dye-houses.  Recent 
developments  have  exposed  more  of the river to view, however  the town  has yet to make  the 
most  of the opportunities  this provides. 
26.42  The River  Stour  enters  the River  Severn  at Stourport-on-Severn.  The potential  of the 
river at this location  has been  largely  over-looked  in recent  years;  however , there  is potential 
for sensitive  development  adjacent  to the river on former  industrial  sites where  flood  risk 
assessment  allows. 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  - Stourport-on-Severn 
26.43  Stourport-on-Severn  is unique  as the only town  in Britain  built solely  as a consequence 
of the construction  of a canal.  At one time only second  to Birmingham  as the Midlands'  busiest 
inland  port, despite  the significant  decline  in industry  in the town  the canal  remains  crucial  to 
the local tourism  offer. 
26.44  The historic  and cultural  significance  of the canal  to the development  of 
Stourport-on-Severn  and to the industrialisation  of the wider  District  is explained  within  the 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  Conservation  Area  Appraisal. 
26.45  Whilst  Stourport  Basins  have  benefited  from successful  restoration  schemes,  their 
potential  as a visitor  attraction  remains  secondary  to that of the River  Severn  and the 
amusements  lining  its banks.  Longer  visitor  stays  could  be encouraged  by capitalising  on 
heritage-based  tourism. 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  – Kidderminster 
26.46  The canal  runs through  the town  centre  and adjacent  to several  large  retailers  as well 
as places  to eat and drink,  however  the potential  of the canal  has yet to be fulfilled. 
26.47  There  is great  economic  potential  yet to be unlocked  in Kidderminster  provided  by 
canal-based  tourism.  Anecdotal  evidence,  however , suggests  that a fear of anti-social  behaviour 
and a perceived  remoteness  from the town  centre  deter  all but brief stops.  The canal  does  not 
benefit  from much  natural  surveillance  and litter, graffiti and poorly  surfaced  and signposted 
pedestrian  routes  contribute  to a perception  that the town  does  not relate  well to the canal. 
Wyre Forest  District 
183 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 26 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness Given  the close  proximity  to the canal  of supermarkets  and restaurants  easily  accessible  by 
car consideration  must  be given  to supporting  development  which  forges  stronger  links between 
the canal  and the town,  whilst  providing  activity  throughout  the day. 
Nature 
26.48  The District’ s waterways  present  an opportunity  to provide  essential  green  infrastructure 
and biodiversity  corridors  and habitats.  This policy  should  be read in conjunction  with policies 
SP.23 - Protecting  and Enhancing  Biodiversity , SP.24 Protecting  and Enhancing 
Geodiversity  and SP.28 Green  Infrastructure.   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 184 Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 26 Policy  DM.29  - Re-use  and adaptation  of rural  buildings 
1. Development  proposals  for the re-use  and adaptation  of rural buildings  designed 
for  any new use will be considered  in accordance  with the following  criteria: 
a. The rural building(s)  are permanent  structures  of a size which  makes  them  suitable 
for conversion  without  the need  for additional  extensions,  substantial  alterations, 
significant  building  works  (or complete  reconstruction),  or the addition  of any new 
buildings  within  the curtilage. 
b. The rural building(s)  are in keeping  with their surroundings  and the conversion 
works  would  have  no significant  detrimental  effect on the fabric,  character  or setting 
of the building. 
c. The proposed  development  enhances  and safeguards  heritage  assets  and the 
pattern  and form of the buildings  within  historic  farmsteads. 
d. Suitable  access  arrangements  can be made,  without  the need  for extensive  new 
access  roads  onto the public  highway  or within  the site itself. 
e. There  is no adverse  impact  on the countryside,  landscape  and wildlife  or local 
amenities. 
f. Appropriate  drainage  and flood  risk mitigation,  including  safe access  requirements, 
can be provided  and maintained  for the lifetime  of the development. 
2. Development  proposals  which  provide  economic  activity  supportive  of local needs  will 
be encouraged  and considered  on their merits,  assessed  against  the criteria  in section 
1 above. 
3. Development  proposals  for residential  use must  demonstrate  that a suitable  economic 
development  use is not viable  and provide  clear  and convincing  justification  for 
residential  use. 
4. In addition  to the criteria  in section  1 above,  development  proposals  for residential  use 
must  also demonstrate  that: 
a. The proposals  do not lead to the dispersal  of economic  activity  which  would  have 
an adverse  impact  on the local economy  or prejudice  the vitality  of nearby  town 
centres  or villages. 
b. The proposals  do not involve  the conversion  of domestic  outbuildings. 
5. Where  permission  has been  granted  previously  (whether  through  this policy  or former 
policies)  for the conversion  of rural buildings  to other  uses,  the provisions  of Policy 
DM.24  - Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness  will apply  to all new development 
proposals  affecting  those  buildings. 
6. Where   previous  development  has relied  upon  this policy  or an earlier  equivalent  no 
further  development  (including  extensions)  will be permitted  within  the curtilage. 
7. Where  a rural building  has been  converted  to residential  use under  permitted 
development  legislation,  permitted  development  rights  will be withdrawn  on 
commencement  of that use and no further  development  (including  extensions)  will be 
permitted  within  the curtilage. 
Wyre Forest  District 
185 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 27 Rural  Development Reasoned  Justification 
27.1 The re-use  and adaption  of existing  rural buildings  is an important  planning  consideration. 
With the changing  structure  of the rural economy  many  agricultural  and rural buildings  are 
becoming  surplus  to requirements.  The re-use  of such  buildings  may provide  economic  benefits 
to rural areas,  allowing  farm diversification  for uses  such  as commercial,  leisure,  tourism  and 
sport  and recreation.  The re-use  of rural buildings  can also help to reduce  the need  for new 
buildings  to be erected  in the countryside. 
27.2 It is important  that the architectural  or historic  characteristics  of rural buildings  are not 
destroyed  through  conversion.  Residential  conversion  can result  in the greatest  change  and 
can be detrimental  to both the fabric  and character  of historic  rural buildings  and their appearance 
in the landscape. 
27.3 Proposals  for the residential  use of rural buildings  will be considered  in the light of 
physical  effects  of the conversion  on the character  of the building,  its significance,  existing 
wildlife,  and its appearance  in the landscape. 
27.4 New windows  and doors  and external  domestic  features  such  as gardens  and parking 
can be detrimental  to a rural building  and its setting. 
27.5 The degree  of harm  on the character  and appearance  of the countryside  is an important 
consideration  when  assessing  the effects of residential  curtilage  or establishing  the likely  demand 
for further  buildings  on the site. The Council  is unlikely  to give permission  for proposals  for 
residential  conversion  where  this requires  extensive  alteration  or rebuilding,  or if the creation 
of a residential  curtilage  would  have  a harmful  effect on the character  of the countryside.  To 
this end, no extensions  to dwellings  created  (whether  through  Policy  DM.29  and earlier  rural 
building  policies  or via implementation  of permitted  development  rights)  will be permitted,  and 
neither  will the introduction  of new buildings  into the curtilage  of these  dwellings. 
27.6 The West Midlands  Farmsteads  and Landscapes  Project  and subsequent  guidance 
provides  a key element  of the evidence  base  and provides  support  for the policy  approach  of 
Policy  DM.29.  The District  Council  will use evidence  contained  within  the West Midlands  Historic 
Farmsteads  and Landscapes  Project  to inform  its decision  making. 
Policy  DM.30  - Chalets,  Caravans,  Mobile  Homes 
Mobile  home  and caravan  sites represent  one of the biggest  development  pressures  in the 
rural areas  of the District.  The issue  is most  prevalent  along  (but not confined  to) the River 
Severn  and to the west of the River  Severn  around  the Wyre Forest  itself. 
1. Further  caravan,  mobile  home  and chalet  developments  or changes  of these 
developments  from holiday  use to permanent  residential  occupation  within  the District   
will be resisted  due to the collective  impact  which  existing  sites have  on the landscape. 
2. Extensions  to existing  chalets  should  be subservient  to and enhance  the appearance 
of the building.  They  should  not have  a significant  adverse  impact  on adjacent  occupiers 
or the surrounding  landscape  and should  comply  with all other  relevant  policy . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 186 Rural  Development 27 3. Changes  to permanent  residential  occupation  of individual  chalets  will only be allowed 
where: 
a. there  is adequate  road access  and car parking  adjacent 
b. there  is reasonable  access  to facilities  by sustainable  transport  (walking  or cycling) 
or public  transport   
c. the building  is of a permanent  construction,  is not liable  to heave  or subsidence, 
and is not liable  to flooding  or located  within  the floodplain 
4. The replacement  of a holiday  use chalet  by a permanent  residential  dwelling  will not 
be permitted 
5. Replacement  of chalets  should  be on a “like for like” basis  in terms  of size and materials 
and should  result  in a reduction  in the visual  impact  on the landscape.  For sites that 
are located  within  the floodplain,  consideration  should  be given  to relocating  chalets 
to an area of lower  flood  risk and it must  be demonstrated  that the development  can 
be made  safe for the lifetime  of the development. 
Reasoned  Justification 
27.7 There  are around  3000  caravans  in the District,  of which  only 200 are permanent 
dwellings,  the remainder  being  licensed  for holiday  use. 
27.8 There  are almost  400 chalets  constructed  before  the 1947  Town and Country  Planning 
Act. 
27.9 Pressures  to further  extend  and modernise  holiday  chalets  may lead to chalet  sites 
evolving  into permanent  residential  estates.  This is highly  undesirable  as they are usually  located 
in areas  where  residential  development  would  not normally  be permitted.  They  are often  found 
in inaccessible  locations  with poor access  roads,  remote  from shops  and schools  and often  in 
areas  liable  to flooding,  heave  or subsidence.  There  is a particular  issue  with these  developments 
along  the River  Severn  and within  the Wyre Forest  itself.  Historically , these  chalets  were  used 
at weekends  and during  the summer  but they are increasingly  being  used  as permanent 
dwellings,  often  with the addition  of a brick  skin. 
Policy  DM.31  - Equestrian  Development 
1. All proposals  for equestrian  related  development  will be assessed  to ensure  that they 
will not individually  or cumulatively  affect the quality  and character  of the landscape 
and the amenity  of any adjacent  residential  areas.  Appropriate  landscaping  and 
screening  should  be provided. 
2. All proposals  for equestrian  related  development  will be required  to demonstrate  that 
they have  taken  full account  of their potential  impact  on local biodiversity  and habitats 
and, wherever  possible,  should  incorporate  measures  to promote  and protect 
biodiversity .  
Wyre Forest  District 
187 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 27 Rural  Development 3. Proposals  for equestrian  related  development  should  not have  an adverse  impact  on 
the safety  and capacity  of the local highway  and public  rights  of way networks.  Any 
new access  from the highway  and on-site  parking  should  be provided  in accordance 
with the appropriate  highways  and parking  standards. 
4. Proposals  for new menages  must  not cause  a harmful  impact  on the character  of the 
landscape  or on the amenity  of neighbouring  occupiers.  They  should  be sited  near to 
the stables  to limit the visual  impact  on the landscape. 
5. Proposals  for flood  lighting  will also require  planning  permission  and, where  it is 
accepted  that such  lighting  is essential,  its use will be controlled  through  conditions 
restricting  its maximum  height,  minimal  glare  and operating  times  in order  to protect 
the amenity  of the area and local residents. 
6. Commercial  Equestrian  Facilities 
a. New developments  associated  with commercial  equestrian  uses  such  as livery 
stables,  riding  schools,  racing  stables  and stud farms  must  not impact  on the 
purposes  and visual  amenity  of the Green  Belt or open  countryside.  Within  the 
Green  Belt, applications  will also be strictly  assessed  against  the criteria  listed 
within  Policy  DM.22 
b. The conversion  of existing  buildings  to genuine  related  uses,  rather  than new 
build,  will be encouraged  where  the existing  buildings  are suitable  for and capable 
of conversion. 
7. Equestrian  Facilities  for Leisure  Use 
In considering  proposals  for smaller  scale  equestrian  developments  relating  to 
non-commercial  leisure  use, applicants  should  have  regard  for the need  for stables/field 
shelters/feed  stores/tack  rooms/menages  to: 
a. Be sited  within  or immediately  adjoining  an existing  building  or complex,  or alongside 
an existing  hedgerow . 
b. Be of traditional  design  and blend  naturally  into the landscape. 
c. Comply  with the space  standards  for stables  as recommended  by the British  Horse 
Society . (45) 
d. Provide  sufficient  facilities  so as to be fit for purpose  without  the need  for additional 
extensions  or addition  of new permanent  or temporary  structures  on the site. 
Reasoned  Justification 
27.10  The keeping  of horses  on agricultural  land usually  requires  planning  permission  for the 
change  of use. 
45 Code  of practice  for the welfare  of HORSES,  PONIES,  DONKEYS  AND  THEIR  HYBRIDS 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov .uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/700200/horses-welfare-codes-of-practice-april2018.pdf 
In line with recommendations  from the British  Horse  Society , and in recognising  the need  to allow  suitable  stables, 
developments  to address  horse  welfare,  whilst  managing  the impact  on the countryside,  the Council  considers  that 
the maximum  size for a single  stable  for leisure  use should  be 3.65m  x 4.25m.  The roof should  be a reasonable  clear 
space  (at least  1m) above  the withers  of the horse. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 188 Rural  Development 27 27.11 Physical  development  on the land such as stables,  tack rooms,  feed stores  and menages 
also requires  planning  permission. 
27.12  Careful  consideration  will be given  to the impact  of proposals  on the landscape  character 
of the surrounding  area.  The cumulative  impact  of temporary  stores  and stables  and new field 
divisions  adjacent  to permanent  facilities  can have  a harmful  impact  on the surrounding 
countryside  or Green  Belt. Relevant  conditions  or S.106  agreements  may be imposed  on 
planning  permissions  where  necessary . 
27.13  Applicants  will be required  to submit  evidence  alongside  their proposals  to demonstrate 
that they have  taken  full account  of the potential  impacts  on local habitat  and biodiversity  such 
as the retention  of existing  hedgerows  at field boundaries.  Mitigation  measures  such  as the 
installation  of bird and bat boxes  should  be incorporated  wherever  possible. 
Policy  DM.32  - Agricultural  Land  Quality 
A. Applications  for development  on best and most  versatile  agricultural  land of higher 
quality  grades  will be resisted  where  the site has not been  allocated  in the Local  Plan 
and is considered  worthy  of protection. 
Reasoned  Justification 
27.14  The grade  of agricultural  land should  be taken  into account  alongside  other  sustainability 
considerations  when  determining  planning  applications. 
27.15  Protecting  higher  grade  agricultural  land from development  will indirectly  protect  water 
resources  by protecting  infiltration  capacity . 
27.16  Best and most  versatile  agricultural  land is defined  within  the NPPF  Glossary  as Land 
in grades  1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural  Land  Classification. 
27.17  To assist  in understanding  agricultural  land quality  within  the plan area and to safeguard 
‘best  and most  versatile’  agricultural  land in line with paragraph  174 of the NPPF , strategic  scale 
Agricultural  Land  Classification  (ALC)  Maps  are available  on the www .magic.gov .uk website. 
Natural  England  also has an archive  of more  detailed  ALC surveys  for selected  locations  which 
can be supplied  digitally  by contacting  Natural  England.  Where  no reliable  information  is available, 
the Council  will reasonably  expect  developers  to commission  a new ALC survey  to support  a 
planning  application  for a site they wish to develop 
Wyre Forest  District 
189 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 27 Rural  Development 28.1 The Development  Strategy  (Chapter  5) describes  the overall  level of development 
required  and the type of development  that is appropriate  in each  of the broad  areas  of the 
District.  This section  allocates  the sites which  will deliver  the required  development. 
28.2   Policy  SP.1 sets out a housing  requirement  of 5,520  dwellings  plus 487  C2/Institutional 
(eg Care  Homes)  bedspaces   to be built in the 20 year plan period  to 2036.  This number  was 
set through  the Housing  Need  Study  using  the Government’ s latest  guidance  and will be regarded 
as a minimum  rather  than a target  by the District.   It is also necessary  for the District  Council 
to provide  some  flexibility  through  an apparent  over-provision:  this is to make  allowances  for 
sites not coming  forward  (eg  for reasons  associated  with deliverability).  This section  reflects 
the settlement  hierarchy  described  at Policy  SP.2 
How  have  the  housing  sites  been  selected? 
28.3  An ongoing   ‘call for sites’  was initiated  in the autumn  of 2014  which  led to the Housing 
and Employment  Land   Availability  Assessment  (HELAA)  being  published  in May 2016.  This 
was updated  in 2018  and then completely  refreshed  in 2019.  Essentially  the role of the HELAA 
is to identify  a range  of sites that may have  potential  for housing  development  over the coming 
years.  It is important  to note that a site’s inclusion  in the HELAA  does  not necessarily  mean  it 
is suitable  for development  – merely  that it has been  put forward  (most  often  by the landowner) 
as a possibility  for consideration  by the Council  for future  allocation.   The HELAA  therefore 
provided  a basket  of sites from which  choices  have  been   made  during  the preparation  of the 
Plan. 
28.4 Sites  have  also been  put forward  for inclusion  on the Brownfield  Land  Register  and some 
of these  are suitable  for allocation. 
28.5 The site allocations  have  to be based  on evidence.  All of the sites have  been  assessed 
against  the same  planning  criteria  to assess  the suitability  of each  of them  for development, 
focussing  on the three  elements  of sustainability  (environmental,  social  and economic)  and 
incorporate  consideration  of other  technical  evidence  generated  in the preparation  of the Local 
Plan,  including: 
Green  Belt Study 
Strategic  Flood  Risk Assessment 
Water Cycle  Study 
Heritage  Impact  Assessment 
Viability  Assessment 
Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan 
28.6 In making  the decision  as to whether  to include  a site or not in these  allocations,  it is 
important  to note that there  is rarely  a site that satisfies   all criteria:  therefore  this means  that 
judgement  has to be exercised  and aspects  of evidence  balanced  against  each  other . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 190 Site Allocations  Introduction 28 The Site Allocations 
28.7 Policies  in Chapters  29 to 36 describe  details  of the sites that are allocated  in this Local 
Plan.  Each  chapter  covers  a different  area of the district.  Policies  also set out specific 
requirements  for the individual  sites.  As well as these  specific  requirements,  the relevant 
provisions  of other  policies  contained  in the Plan will apply  to development  on the allocated 
sites.  The individual  housing  site policies  include  provisional  5 year phasing  periods  for their 
development  which  relate  to those  shown  in the detailed  housing  trajectory . The figure  for the 
number  of dwellings  in the site allocations  is an indicative  figure  that takes  account  of the site 
area and any known  constraints  (e.g. where  parts  of the site have  a risk of flooding  or ecological 
constraints)  and, unless  more  specific  details  are available,  is calculated  to a density  in sympathy 
with the surrounding  area. 
Infrastructure  requirements 
28.8 All the relevant  infrastructure  requirements  for the site contained  in the following  policies 
are set out in the Wyre Forest  Infrastructure   Delivery  Plan (IDP)  which  forms  part of the evidence 
base.  Particular  reference  should  be made  to the chapters  on transport  and education. 
Site Plans 
28.9 Each  individual  site policy  includes  a map showing  the location  of the site on an Ordnance 
Survey  basemap  Copyright  100018317 
28.10   Minerals  and Waste Allocations  where  minerals  resource  safeguarding  has been 
highlighted  together  with those  sites potentially  affecting  minerals  infrastructure  and waste 
management  facilities  are listed  in Chapter  15 – Pollution,  Minerals  and Waste. 
Wyre Forest  District 
191 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 28 Site Allocations  Introduction Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  29: Lea Castle  Village  (please  refer  to 
Policies  Map for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Monday, March 21, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:5000 @ A1
SP.LCV1 and
SP.LCV2
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 192 Strategic  Allocation  Lea Castle  Village 29 Lea Castle  Village  (120ha)   
Reasoned  Justification 
29.1 Lea Castle  Village  is centred  on the former  hospital  site and is bounded  by the A449 
(Wolverhampton  Road),  Axborough  Lane,  the A451  (Stourbridge  Road)  and the B4190  (Park 
Gate  Road).  The vision  is to create  a new sustainable  village  with enough  housing  to generate 
a new village  centre  with its own local shop,  primary  school  and perhaps  a GP surgery  in order 
for the development  to provide  for the needs  of the new community  and minimise  impact  on 
nearby  social  infrastructure.  Housing  will be provided  to cater  for all sections  of the community 
with a mix of dwelling  types,  sizes  and tenures.  It is envisaged  that Lea Castle  Village  will also 
provide  land for employment  uses  as well as new and upgraded  sports  pitches.  All of this will 
be provided  in an extensive  woodland/landscape  setting. 
29.2 The allocation  is for the whole  site. The central  area has outline  planning  approval 
(17/0205/OUTL)  for up to 600 dwellings,  up to 3,350sqm  B1, 150sqm  A1/A3/D1  uses  (local 
shop/  cafe/  community  space),  public  open  space,  ecological  mitigation,  drainage  works, 
infrastructure  and ancillary  works.  (Main  access  to be from Park Gate  Road  with secondary 
access  from The Crescent  and limited  access  from Axborough  Lane).  Development  of the 600 
dwellings  is now well advanced  under  planning  approval   19/0724/RESE. 
Policy  SP.LCV1  - Lea Castle  vision 
The site is allocated  for development  of a sustainable  village  of high quality  design.  The 
development  of Lea Castle  Village  over the plan period  will be achieved  through: 
i. Delivery  of around  1,400  new dwellings  (600 of these  already  have  planning  permission) 
ii. Provision  of around  7 hectares  for employment  development  to meet  the requirements 
of a range  of businesses 
iii. Provision  of around  2 hectares  for a 420 place  primary  school 
iv. Creation  of a village  centre  to include: 
a. Retail  provision  appropriate  to local needs;  and  
b. A flexible  community  facility  able to accommodate  a meeting  room,  cafe and 
potentially  a GP surgery  together  with some  C2 provision 
v. Retention  and upgrading  of 3 existing  grass  playing  pitches  and changing  facilities 
together  with provision  of land for either  an artificial  grass  pitch  (3G) or alternative 
suitable  outdoor  sport/recreation  facilities 
vi. Retention  of existing  woodland  and hedgerows  (other  than where  access  is required) 
with additional  native  planting  to provide  substantial  buffering  around  new development 
vii. Incorporation  of additional  green  infrastructure  including  the creation  of an area of acid 
grassland  adjacent  to Axborough  Wood 
viii. Provision  of allotments  or community  orchard 
ix. Provision  of pedestrian  and cycle  links both within  and off the site to connect  to facilities 
in Cookley  and Broadwaters  as well as to nearby  schools 
Wyre Forest  District 
193 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 29 Strategic  Allocation  Lea Castle  Village Site specific  Principles  of Development 
29.3 In addition  to the requirements  set out in Policy  SP.LCV1,  the following  points  should 
also be adhered  to. 
Policy  SP.LCV2  - Lea Castle  Village  Principles  of Development 
Overall  Design 
i. The site must  be planned  and developed  on a comprehensive  basis.  Design  principles 
will be agreed  in accordance  with an approved  indicative  masterplan  for the entire 
site to ensure  a sustainable  and high quality  development  and all developers  will be 
expected  to adhere  to these  agreed  principles.  Any mitigation  required  in terms  of 
noise,  air quality , drainage  and ecology  should  be determined  at an early  stage 
ii. The development  will aim to achieve  Building  for a Healthy  Life and Building  with Nature 
accreditation 
iii. Development  off Axborough  Lane  will consist  of areas  of lower  density  housing 
iv. Recording  of above  ground  heritage  assets  is required  along  with a further 
desk-based  archaeological  assessment  to identify  potential  for archaeology  and inform 
any requirements  about  the scope  and scale  of any preservation  and mitigation 
Physical  infrastructure 
v. The development  will be expected  to deliver  highway  improvements  at nearby  junctions 
as required  and provide  bus, walking  and cycling  links throughout  the site  
vi. A through  route  serving  the school/community  facility  and the residential  development 
should  be provided  to allow  for buses  to be diverted  through  the centre  of the site to 
enable  quality  public  transport  provision  and encourage  active  travel 
vii. The employment  area should  incorporate  sustainability  measures  into the design  and 
include  start-up  units 
Social  Infrastructure 
viii. Opportunities  for community-led  housing  schemes  will be considered  and local 
community-led  groups  will be encouraged  to work  with selected  developers  in order 
to meet  housing  needs 
ix. Self-build  plots  should  be provided  on an appropriate  part of the site 
x. The provision  of some  custom-build  dwellings  should  be made  where  viable  to do so 
xi. Provision  must  be made  early  on in the development  phases  for a community  facility 
that contains  space  that can be used  for a number  of uses  on a flexible  basis 
Environmental  Infrastructure   
xii. Developments  will be expected  to make  a net positive  effect on the local green 
infrastructure  network 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 194 Strategic  Allocation  Lea Castle  Village 29 xiii. Developments  should  protect  and contribute  to connectivity  for wildlife,  ensuring  that 
an appropriate  buffer is provided  for existing  and new woodland  to minimise  impacts 
of lighting  and noise  on protected  species 
xiv. Axborough  Wood (ancient  woodland)  must  be appropriately  buffered  from any new 
development 
xv. No development  will be allowed  in the north-east  corner  of the site at the junction 
between  the A451  and Axborough  Lane  as a mains  gas pipeline  crosses  the site at 
this location.  Development  should  be kept below  the ridgeline  on the A451  in order  to 
preserve  the existing  linear  treeline 
xvi. Landscaping  will be required  around  all development  outside  of the former  hospital 
site in order  to soften  the impact  on the landscape  and wider  views 
xvii. On-site  physical  activity  should  be encouraged  with a network  of circular  routes  created 
around  the site. It should  provide  pedestrian  and cycle  links within  the site and from 
the site to give convenient  safe routes  to local facilities  and into the surrounding  area. 
This should  include  circular  woodland  trails  / nature  trails/  trim trails  within  the site to 
encourage  active  lifestyles  within  the development  and limit additional  pressure  on the 
nearby  Sites  of Special  Scientific  Interest  at Hurcott 
xviii. Recreational  activities  should  be discouraged  within  areas  known  to support 
light-and-disturbance-sensitive  statutorily  protected  species  (the horseshoe  bats and 
dormice) 
xix. A habitat  management  plan will be required 
xx. Biodiversity  measures  will be expected  to be incorporated  into building  design  eg. 
green  roofs,  green  walls,  bat boxes,  nesting  boxes 
xxi. All proposals  are to take into consideration  the Kidderminster  North  Green  Infrastructure 
Concept  Statement 
xxii. Existing  mature  boundary  trees  should  be retained  where  possible  and supplemented 
to partially  screen  and allow  filtered  views  of the development 
xxiii. Light  pollution  should  be kept to a minimum  to protect  wildlife,  especially  bat colonies. 
Only minimal  lighting  is to be used  through  woodland  areas 
xxiv. Planting  along  the western  boundary  with the A449  should  be extended  to provide 
screening  to the west and enhance  the wider  Lea Castle  site GI network.  Any 
development  on the north-west  of the site must  buffer the setting  of Lea Castle  Farm 
and avoid  visual  coalescence  with Cookley 
Wyre Forest  District 
195 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 29 Strategic  Allocation  Lea Castle  Village Map Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  30: Kidderminster  Eastern 
Extension  (Please  refer  to Policies  Map for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Monday, March 21, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:3000 @ A1
SP.KEE1
SP.KEE3 and 
SP.KEE4
SP.KEE3 and 
SP.KEE4
SP.KEE2 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 196 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension 30 Land  at Husum  Way 2.11ha 30 dwellings  2031-36 
30.1 This site is immediately  adjacent  to the built-up  area and is in arable  use. The site fronts 
the A456  on its northern  edge  with the main  railway  line to the south  (in a cutting).  It is bordered 
by  Husum  Way to the west which  serves  Offmore  Farm  Estate  and connects  through  to 
Comberton  Estate  and to the east the site is bounded  by Hodge  Hill Farmhouse,  barns  and 
cottages.  This complex  is accessed  via a track  running  alongside  the site which  also provides 
the existing  access  to the field. 
Policy  SP.KEE1-  Land  at Husum  Way  
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Access  to the site will be taken  from Husum  Way 
ii. Part of the site may be required  for a revised  junction  at the end of Husum  Way 
iii. Development  should  be set back  from the A456  and from Hodge  Hill Farmhouse  and 
Barns  behind  a substantial  landscape  buffer in order  to soften  the transition  from rural 
to suburban  character  and protect  the setting  of the 18th century  Hodge  Hill Farm 
complex 
iv. Any new development  should,  in terms  of form,  scale  and massing  respect  the 
orientation  and setting  of the farmstead  and historic  views  from and towards  the 
farmstead 
v. A further  landscape  buffer will be required  alongside  the edge  of the railway  to enhance 
this wildlife  corridor 
vi. Sensitive  lighting  will be required  to protect  habitats  and their use by protected  species, 
along  the road and rail embankments 
vii. Existing  boundary  hedgerows  and trees  should  be retained  and supplemented  with 
additional  native  planting  other  than where  access  is required 
viii. Building  heights  should  reflect  neighbouring  development  especially  on the eastern 
part of the site nearest  Hodge  Hill Farm  Barns 
ix. Densities  should  be much  lower  in the eastern  part of the site to allow  for additional 
soft landscaping  among  the dwellings  in order  to create  a more  rural feel 
Reasoned  Justification 
30.2 This development  will become  the new edge  to Kidderminster  when  travelling  into the 
town  from Blakedown  and Hagley  along  the A456.  It is important  that this site gives  a 
well-designed  transition  from a rural character  of isolated  dwellings  into a suburban  development 
of the urban  area.  High quality  landscaping  and building  design  will be very important  at this 
gateway  site. 
Wyre Forest  District 
197 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 30 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension Comberton  Lodge  Nursery  (0.80ha)  9 dwellings  2021-26 
30.3 This former  plant  nursery  is presently  used  by a landscaping  firm. It has frontage  to the 
A448  Bromsgrove  Road.  It lies just beyond  the built-up  area and is in the Green  Belt. The land 
is bounded  by the Hoo Brook  to the north  and west and Comberton  Lodge  and its grounds  to 
the east.  Immediately  to the east of the site, the Hoo and Barnett  Brook  is a designated  Local 
Wildlife  Site. 
Policy  SP.KEE2  - Comberton  Lodge  Nursery   
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Access  to the development  must  be taken  from the A448  and not from the larger  site 
to the rear 
ii. The adjacent  Comberton  Lodge  and Heathy  Mill Farm  complex  are both on the local 
heritage  list and their settings  should  be protected  from development 
iii. The rear part of the site falls within  the flood  zone  associated  with the brook 
(approximately  0.24ha)  and should  be left undeveloped  and managed  as a green 
corridor 
iv. Mature  trees  along  the watercourse  and the road frontage  form part of a wooded 
east-west  corridor  across  the wider  landscape  and should  be retained 
v. An ecologically  functional  buffer zone  should  be retained  around  the woodland  and 
brook  with development  kept to the central  part of the site 
vi. Bat and otter surveys  will be required  to inform  the site design,  layout  and lighting 
vii. The Hoo Brook  corridor  must  be protected  from lighting,  surface  water  run-of f and 
other  pollutants  likely  to arise  from any development 
viii. A detailed  site-specific  flood  risk assessment  will be required  to inform  the developable 
area and ensure  a safe and sustainable  development.  Opportunities  to help improve 
flood  storage  and flood  flow conveyance,  linked  to blue infrastructure  enhancements, 
should  be implemented  where  possible. 
Reasoned  Justification 
30.4 This small  former  plant  nursery  consists  of a number  of rundown  polytunnels  and a large 
area of hardstanding.  A carefully  designed  low density  development  set back  from the road 
behind  substantial  landscaping  would  help to improve  the setting  of the neighbouring  Locally 
Listed  buildings  at Heathy  Mill and Comberton  Lodge.  The Hoo Brook  forms  the northern  and 
western  boundaries  to the site and its flood  zone  affects  part of the site. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 198 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension 30 Land  at Comberton  Road  (84.36ha)  1400  dwellings  plus community  facilities 
Reasoned  Justification 
30.5 The site is allocated  for the development  of 1400  dwellings,  a community  hub and 
extensive  open  space.  The site is currently  predominantly  arable  land divided  by hedgerows. 
There  is one public  right of way which  crosses  the southern  part of the site from near the 
Spennells  Valley Road  /Comberton  Road  roundabout  and connects  through  to Harvington 
village.  The Hoo Brook  Local  Wildlife  Site lies adjacent  to the southern  boundary  of the site. 
The land immediately  to the north  of the Hoo Brook  will be left undeveloped  together  with land 
alongside  the western  boundary  (delineated  by a tributary  of the Hoo Brook)  which  will be 
designated  as a new linear  wetland  nature  reserve.  A detailed  site specific  flood  risk assessment 
will be required  to inform  the developable  areas  and ensure  a safe and sustainable  development. 
Opportunities  to help improve  flood  storage  and flood  flow conveyance,  linked  to blue and green 
infrastructure  enhancements,  will be implemented  where  possible.  The overall  vision  is to create 
an attractive  mixed  tenure  residential  development  offering  a choice  of high quality  new homes 
to meet  local needs  set within  an extensive  area of green  space  which  is readily  accessible  to 
everyone  in the area.  The aim is to create  a place  where  people  want  to live and local residents 
can easily  access  nature. 
Policy  SP.KEE3  - Land  at Comberton  Road  Overall  Vision 
The development  of this site over the Local  Plan period  will be achieved  through: 
i. The delivery  of around  1,400  new dwellings   
ii. The creation  of a community  hub to include: 
a. 2 hectares  of land for a 420 place  primary  school 
b. Retail  provision  appropriate  to local needs 
c. A community  facility  able to accommodate  a meeting  room,  cafe and potentially 
a GP surgery 
d. Playing  pitches 
iii. The main  site access  will be from the existing  roundabout  on the A448  by Spennells 
Valley Road.  A secondary  access  will be taken  off Husum  Way to the south  of the 
railway  bridge.  The spine  road will be a single  carriageway  suitable  for buses  with a 
20 mph speed  limit with cycle  and pedestrian  provision  alongside 
iv. Pedestrian  and cycle  links will be provided  from the site to connect  with existing 
development  on Comberton  Estate  (through  Borrington  Park)  and on Offmore  Estate 
(via Offmore  Farm  Close)  and on through  to the rail station  and town  centre  together 
with diversion  of buses  to serve  the new development 
v. A linear  nature  reserve  will be created  along  the western  edge  of the site offering  new 
ecological  wetland  habitats  and providing  a buffer zone  between  the existing  and 
proposed  developments 
vi. An area of allotments  or community  orchard  will be provided  on the northern  part of 
the site in the vicinity  of Offmore  Farm  barns 
Wyre Forest  District 
199 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 30 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension vii. Play facilities  should  include  opportunities  for natural  play  
viii. Existing  hedgerows  and natural  features  should  be retained  and supplemented  as part 
of a comprehensive  GI strategy  taking  into account  the Kidderminster  East GI Concept 
Statement 
ix. The Hoo Brook  and its tributaries  will require  an ecological  buffer to protect  existing 
wildlife  as well as appropriate  blue and green  infrastructure  enhancements  including 
flood  storage  reduction  measures  where  possible 
x. The rising  land to the north-east  of Offmore  Farm  Court  will form part of an extensive 
area of natural  open  greenspace  with a network  of footpaths  running  around  the site 
boundary  and connecting  across  the development  to encourage  recreational  use. 
Those  areas  of open  space  along  the eastern  and southern  boundaries  of the site will 
remain  undeveloped  and within  the Green  Belt 
Site Specific  Principles  of Development  for Land  at Comberton  Road   
SP.KEE4  - Land  at Comberton  Road  Principles  of Development 
Overall  Design 
i. A masterplan  should  be drawn  up as part of any outline  planning  application  which 
should  include  information  on phasing  and implementation  to ensure  effective  integration 
with provision  of the school 
ii. Approximately  50% of the site area should  be retained  as green  space  with a linked 
network  of paths/cycleways  throughout  the site. A number  of circular  routes  should  be 
provided  on the site to encourage  people  away  from more  sensitive  sites nearby . Areas 
of new woodland  planting  should  be at least  30 metres  wide where  possible 
iii. The site will be split into distinct  character  areas  based  around  ‘village  greens’.  The 
overall  design  will be expected  to adhere  to an agreed  design  code 
iv. The development  will aim to achieve  Building  For a Healthy  Life and Building  with 
Nature  accreditation 
v. The existing  GI framework  should  be fully integrated  into the masterplan,  avoid  and 
minimise  landscape  and visual  impacts  of built development.  The north-south  woodland 
corridor  that forms  the western  site boundary  and the historic  north-south  hedgerow 
that forms  the eastern  boundary  should  be supplemented  and buffered  to soften  the 
transition  from suburban  to rural landscape 
vi. The site has potential  for below  ground  archaeology  and should  be assessed  as part 
of a programme  of works  that will potentially  include  geophysical  survey , trial trenching, 
environmental  sampling  and mitigation  through  more  detailed  investigations.  A 
programme  of trial trench  evaluation  should   be agreed  with the archaeological  advisor 
to the LPA with the results  informing  the scope  of any further  archaeological  works 
required  before  any development  commences.  Appropriate  archaeological  assessment 
should  accompany  or be incorporated  into a Heritage  Statement  submitted  with the 
planning  application  to identify  the significance  of on-site  assets  that may be affected 
and to assess  the impact  of development  on them  and their settings.  An assessment 
of impact  on the setting  of designated  heritage  assets  is also required 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 200 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension 30 Physical  Infrastructure 
vii. The main  site access  road will need  to be carefully  designed  to minimise  ecological 
impact,  in particular  where  it crosses  the watercourse  to the rear of Prior  Close 
viii. Sufficient  detailed  hydraulic  modelling  will be required  to confirm  actual  floodplain 
extents.  The brook  along  the western  boundary  currently  discharges  into a culvert 
under  the A448.  Improvements  to the watercourse  should  be sought  as part of any 
road proposals  to improve  species  migration  between  the nature  reserve  and the wet 
woodland  corridor . 
ix. As the site sits on an aquifer , any treatment  of road run-of f must  use sealed  systems 
to discharge  to on-site  treatment  before  infiltration  or discharge  off-site. 
Social  Infrastructure   
x. Provision  must  be made  for a community  facility  in the early  phases  of development 
that contains  space  that can be used  for a number  of uses  on a flexible  basis. 
xi. The provision  of some  custom-build  dwellings  should  be made  where  viable  to do so 
xii. Self-build  plots  should  be provided  on an appropriate  part of the site 
Environmental  Infrastructure   
xiii. The eastern  edge  of the development  will be planted  up to give a substantial  green 
buffer to the development.  This will help to provide  an additional  quieter  north  south 
wildlife  corridor 
xiv. The Hoo Brook  Local  Wildlife  Site and its associated  wet meadow  will be buffered  from 
development 
xv. Opportunities  should  be sought  to improve  ecological  and pedestrian  links between 
the western  wooded  stream  corridor  on the edge  of the site, the Hoo Brook  LWS and 
the Spennells  Valley nature  reserve  to the south  of the A448. 
xvi. Where  feasible,  historic  features  and water  bodies  relating  to Lord Foley’ s irrigation 
system  should  be retained  as boundary  features  or as part of open  space.  The potential 
to sensitively  integrate  these  into the site’s SuDS  should  be examined  and implemented 
where  possible.  Opportunities  to promote  the historic  and landscape  significance  of 
this 17th century  example  of agricultural  design  and innovation  as part of open  space 
management  should  also be considered. 
xvii.  A long-term  habitat  management  and monitoring  plan should  be agreed  as part of any 
planning  application. 
Wyre Forest  District 
201 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 30 Strategic  Allocation  Kidderminster  Eastern  Extension Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  31: Blakedown  (Please  refer  to Policies 
Map (for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Monday, March 21, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:2500 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 202 Strategic  Allocations  Blakedown 31 Station  Yard Blakedown  (0.27ha)  Station  car parking  2021-26 
31.1 This narrow  site has a frontage  to Lynwood 
Drive  and lies adjacent  to the main  railway  line. A 
previous  residential  application  was dismissed  at 
appeal  on grounds  of poor amenity  for future 
residents  in terms  of noise  from passing  trains  and 
limited  garden  space.   
Policy  SP.BLK1  - Station  Yard Blakedown   
This site is allocated  for station  car parking  for up to 120 spaces.  The development  should 
meet  the following  requirements: 
i. The potential  to provide  a small  retail  kiosk  on the site should  be explored  and it should 
be incorporated  into the development,  if feasible 
ii. Lighting  should  be designed  to have   minimal  disturbance  to existing  residents  on 
Lynwood  Drive 
iii. Landscaping  should  be provided  to the site boundaries  to buffer the site from 
neighbouring  dwellings 
Reasoned  Justification 
31.2 This small  site is unsuitable  for residential  use. Its location  adjacent  to Blakedown  Station 
makes  it an ideal  site for station  car parking.  The Worcestershire  Rail Investment  Strategy 
(2017)  identifies  Blakedown  as one of 5 locations  under  consideration  for additional  car parking 
to address  the current  shortfall  and provide  capacity  for passenger  growth.  Further  details  are 
included  in the Transport  evidence  paper  and the Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
203 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 31 Strategic  Allocations  Blakedown Land  off Station  Drive,  Blakedown  (2.74ha)  50 dwellings  2026-31  and safeguarding  for 
future  car parking  need 
31.3 This land on the northern  edge  of 
Blakedown  lies between  the A456  and the railway 
line and is adjacent  to Blakedown  station.  It is 
proposed  to safeguard  part of the site for station 
car parking  and develop  the remainder  for housing. 
The site has direct  pedestrian  access  to both the 
station  platform  and the adjacent  bus stop (A456 
Birmingham  Road). 
Policy  SP.BLK2  Land  off Station  Drive,  Blakedown   
This site is allocated  in part for residential  development  with the remainder  safeguarded 
for future  rail station  car parking,  the location  of which  will be established  by the Council 
and the site owner  following  an appropriate  study . The need  for safeguarding  the land will 
be kept under  review  during  the Plan Period,  having  regard  to demand  for car parking  at 
the station,  projected  future  demand  for car parking  at the station  and other  relevant 
matters.  The development  should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. Vehicular  access  should  be taken  from Station  Drive 
ii. The plantation  woodland  alongside  the railway  line should  be retained  and 
supplemented  with additional  planting  where  required 
iii. The existing  hedgerow  along  the A456  boundary  should  be retained  and supplemented 
where  required 
iv.  A pedestrian  access  onto the station  platform  and onto the A456  adjacent  to the bus 
shelter  should  be incorporated  into the development   
v. Churchill  and Blakedown  Valleys  Local  Wildlife  Site (LWS) partially  overlaps  the site 
to the north.  The development  should  provide  buffering  for the LWS with the 
embankment  and woodland  retained  as open  space.  The development  should  optimise 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 204 Strategic  Allocations  Blakedown 31 the potential  for SuDs  and the creation  of a mosaic  of semi-natural  marshland  and wet 
woodland  on the site. Much  of the LWS falls within  Flood  Zones  2 or 3 
vi. The development  should  be designed  to retain  and protect  the mature  trees  on the 
Station  Drive  frontage  with canopies  kept free of lighting  for ecological  reasons.  Where 
trees  cannot  be retained,  full justification  must  be provided  as part of a Tree Survey 
and Arboricultural  Impact  Assessment,  and any unavoidable  losses  should  be replaced 
within  the proposed  development 
vii. Any potential  adverse  impacts  on views  from/of  Harbrough  Hall (Grade  II Listed)  should 
be mitigated  for by additional  planting  along  the eastern  boundary  where  required,  and 
by sensitive  design  of the development 
viii. The new housing  should  be provided  in accordance  with policies  elsewhere  in Local 
Plan and also to meet  any local housing  need  as shown  in a Parish  Housing  Needs 
Survey  and/or  the Housing  Register 
ix. The car parking  provision  should  be brought  forward  sequentially  following  the provision 
of car parking  on the allocated  site at Station  Yard (Policy  SP.BLK1)  and only if future 
demand  justifies  it 
Reasoned  Justification 
31.4 Development  of this site would  constitute  a rounding  off of the settlement  of Blakedown 
and provide  a strong  and defensible  Green  Belt boundary  using  the stream,  pools  and woodland 
to the north  and the A456  to the east.  Blakedown  is a well-served  village  with easy  access  to 
local shops,  primary  school,  sports  facilities  and regular  train services  into Hagley  and 
Kidderminster  for other  services.  Housing  development  on this site would  also help towards 
meeting  future  housing  needs  in Blakedown  village. 
31.5 Additional  car parking  may be needed  in the Plan Period  at Blakedown  railway  station 
to meet  the demand  for car parking  spaces  for rail users  on the commuter  line to the Black 
Country  and Birmingham  as evidenced  in the SLC Rail document.  Although  the northern  end 
of the site falls within  Flood  Zones  2 or 3, this area will be left undeveloped  as it is protected  by 
its designation  as a Local  Wildlife  Site. A detailed  site-specific  Flood  Risk Assessment  will be 
required  at the planning  stage  to inform  the developable  area and ensure  a safe and sustainable 
development.  Opportunities  to help improve  flood  storage  and flood  flow conveyance,  linked  to 
blue infrastructure  enhancements,  will be implemented  where  feasible. 
Wyre Forest  District 
205 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 31 Strategic  Allocations  Blakedown Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  32: Kidderminster  Town (please  refer 
to Policies  Map for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Monday, March 21, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:10000 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 206 Kidderminster  Town 32 Chester  Road  South  Service  Station   (0.41ha)  15 dwellings  2021-26 
32.1 This former  petrol  and gas station  site has 
full planning  permission  for 15 dwellings. 
Policy  SA.K1  - Chester  Road  South  Service  Station   
Development  of this site should: 
i.  Ensure,  where  feasible,  that housing  faces  the main  road to continue  the strong  building 
line along  Chester  Road  South 
ii. Fully  consider  and address,  as necessary , any contamination  issues  on the site 
iii. Protect  and supplement  existing  mature  vegetation  adjacent  to the railway  line 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.2 This site currently  detracts  from what  is a residential  area.  Proposals  should  respect  the 
streetscene. 
Wyre Forest  District 
207 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Lea Street  School   (0.47ha)  24 dwellings  2021-26 
32.3 This former  school  sits in a densely 
populated  residential  area near the railway  station 
characterised  by Victorian  terraced  housing.  It 
occupies  a plot with frontages  to both Lea Street 
and Cherry  Orchard.  It was constructed  in 1883 
and is on the Kidderminster  Local  Heritage  List.  
It is built across  a steeply  sloping  site with buildings 
at 3 different  levels. 
Policy  SA.K2  - Lea Street  School   
This site is allocated  for residential  uses. 
i. Proposals  should,  where  possible,  look to retain  the original  board  school  buildings 
ii. Mature  trees  fronting  Cherry  Orchard  should  be retained  as part of the development 
iii. Layout,  design  and materials  used  should  be sensitive  to location  and overcome  any 
adverse  impacts  on the heritage  asset 
iv. Proposals  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and 
Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.4 This very attractive  building  is a rare example  of a well-preserved  board  school.  It is the 
only surviving  example  built by the Borough  of Kidderminster  School  Board.  The entire  original 
fixtures  and fittings  are still intact.  A conversion  of the building  would  be supported.  The 
playground  area on Cherry  Orchard  would  be suitable  for a new-build  housing  development. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 208 Kidderminster  Town 32 Land  North  of Bernie  Crossland  Walk  (0.41ha)  9 dwellings  2026-31 
32.5 This area of garden  land adjacent  to the 
railway  line currently  forms  part of rear gardens  to 
dwellings  on Chester  Road  South.  It forms  a logical 
extension  to Bernie  Crossland  Walk. 
Policy  SA.K3  - Land  North  of Bernie  Crossland  Walk 
This site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements:- 
i. Vehicular  access  should  be taken  from Bernie  Crossland  Walk 
ii. The existing  trees  alongside  the railway  corridor  should  be supplemented  as part of 
the wider  Green  Infrastructure  network 
iii. The development  should  continue  the building  line of Bernie  Crossland  Walk with the 
majority  of plots  backing  onto the railway  line 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.6 This small  Greenfield  site is suitable  for development  subject  to any issues  with ransom 
strips  being  overcome. 
Wyre Forest  District 
209 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Land  at Bromsgrove  Street  (Lion  Fields)   (4.87ha)  minimum  of 35 dwellings  plus 
commercial  uses  2026-31 
32.7 This large  town  centre  site includes  the 
cleared  site of the former  Glades  Leisure  Centre, 
the former  Magistrates’  Court  (Worcester  Cross 
Factory),  extensive  car parking  and shops  on the 
northern  side of Worcester  Street.  The NHS 
buildings  and Youth Centre   on Bromsgrove  Street 
will remain  in situ and are outside  of this allocation. 
The former  Magistrates’  Court  buildings  were  listed 
Grade  II in 2018.  Levels  rise 10 metres  across  the 
site from the south  to the north.  Much  of the land 
is owned  and controlled  by the District  Council.  A 
large  part of the £20.5  million  secured  from the 
Future  High Streets  Fund  (announced  in December 
2020)  will be used  to kick-start  the regeneration  of 
the former  Magistrates’  Court  and Worcester  Street 
area.    
Policy  SA.K4  - Land  at Bromsgrove  Street  (Lion  Fields) 
This site is allocated  for a mix of residential  and commercial  development  which  is expected 
to deliver  the following: 
i. On the former  Glades  site -  a cinema  and leisure  complex  with ancillary  food and drink 
together  with car parking 
ii. The former  Magistrates’  Court  building  and indoor  market  - refurbishment  and 
conversion  to a Creative  Hub for businesses  in the digital  and creative  industries  sectors 
iii. Acquisition  and demolition  of properties  at northern  end of Worcester  Street  to improve 
connectivity  from the town  centre  into Lion Fields 
iv. Rationalisation  of existing  car parking  on Bromsgrove  Street  to release  land for mixed 
use development  including  residential  (both  C3 and C2) 
v. All development  must  be of the highest  design  quality  as this site is a key part of the 
planned  renaissance  of the town  centre 
vi. The historic  street  patterns  should  inform  the design  layout  of the new development 
on the northern  part of the site, with consideration  in particular  given  to the height  and 
massing  of buildings  as this will impact  on the skyline  and wider  views  across  the town 
vii. Layout,  design,  scale  and materials  used  in the development  should  take into 
consideration  the designated  heritage  assets  on the southern  part of Worcester  Street 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 210 Kidderminster  Town 32 viii. The area of mature  woodland  to the rear of the former  Glades  Leisure  Centre  site 
adjacent  to the ring road island  should  be extended  north  along  the ring road to link 
with mature  trees  at Lion Street 
ix. The adjacent  NHS  buildings  and the youth  centre  should  have  additional  landscaping 
to soften  their setting  and help to integrate  them  into the new development 
x. The development  should  deliver  enhanced  public  amenity  space  with SuDS  and habitat 
benefits  and include  green  walls  where  possible 
xi. The development  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban 
and Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
xii. In the southern  part of Worcester  Street  (outside  of the area shown  as primary  shopping 
frontage),  proposals  for non-retail  (including  residential)  uses  at ground  floor level will 
be considered  on their merit  (see Policy  DM.13) 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.8 The Council  adopted  the Kidderminster  Eastern  Gateway  Development  Framework  In 
June  2016.  ‘Lion  Fields’  is a large  site occupying  an area historically  developed  in the late 18th 
century  as workers  housing  and redeveloped  in the mid-late  C20 when  the adjacent  ring road 
was constructed.  The northern  part of the site occupies  a plateau  at the top of Prospect  Hill and 
it may be possible  to reinstate  parts  of the historical  street  pattern  as part of any 
redevelopment.  The southern  part of the site is largely  occupied  by the recently  designated 
Former  Worcester  Cross  Factory  which  is a landmark  feature  at the gateway  to the town 
approaching  from the east.  The site has a history  of pre-industrial  development  and there  is 
high potential  for archaeological  remains  below  ground. 
32.9 It is proposed  to bring  Lion Fields  forward  for development  in phases.  A preferred 
developer  for the former  Glades  site was appointed  at the end of 2017.  A mixed-use  leisure 
scheme  is proposed  in this first phase.  The next phase  of development  will include  the former 
Magistrates’  Court  building,  the former  covered  market  area to the rear and the land in front 
which  is currently  laid out as a small  urban  park.  Funding  for this area has been  secured  through 
the Future  High Streets  Fund.  A planning  application  is expected  in 2021. 
32.10  Worcester  Street  marks  the southern  boundary  to Lion Fields  and the County  Council 
reopened  the street  to one-way  traffic and allowed  on-street  parking  in 2019.This  has already 
brought  benefits  to the area.  Future  High Streets  Funds  will also be used  to fund the acquisition 
of empty  buildings  on Worcester  Street  to allow  for their demolition  in order  to improve  pedestrian 
links between  Worcester  Street  and Bromsgrove  Street  as part of any residential  proposals  on 
the existing  car park.  The southern  part of Worcester  Street  has seen  a number  of conversions 
to residential  uses  in recent  years  and further  conversions  should  be encouraged. 
Wyre Forest  District 
211 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Timber  Yard Park  Lane   (2.11ha) 100 dwellings  2026-31 
32.11 This site includes  the former  timber  yard 
together  with steeply  sloping  wooded  land on the 
other  site of Park Lane.  Some  of the site is owned 
by the District  Council.  It is an important  canalside 
location  in the heart  of the town  centre.  This area 
provides  an opportunity  to bring  the canal  back 
into focus  and rejuvenate  this area of the town. 
Much  of the site falls within  flood  zone  2. 
Policy  SA.K5  -  Timber  Yard Park  Lane   
This land is allocated  for residential  development  (C3 and C2) which  should: 
i. Provide  an active  frontage  onto both the canal  and Park Lane 
ii. Create  a high quality  pedestrian  canalside  environment  and public  realm 
iii. Where  practicable,  retain  and incorporate  the historic  building  fronting  Park Lane 
iv. Aim to deliver  a new landmark  pedestrian  bridge  over the canal  to Weavers  Wharf 
v. Incorporate  an area of public  open  space  adjacent  to the canal  to act as a focal  point 
for the scheme 
vi. Investigate  the potential  for additional  mooring  facilities  on the canal  and if feasible, 
integrate  them  into the development 
vii. Take into account  any potential  flooding  issues  on site and incorporate  appropriate 
mitigation  measures 
viii. Retain  and enhance  the wooded  escarpment  on Park Lane  where  possible  as part of 
a wider  GI network  and backdrop  to the town  centre 
ix. Use SuDS   to control  drainage  on site 
x. Integrate  features  such  as living  walls,  green  roofs  and bat/bird  bricks  into development 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 212 Kidderminster  Town 32 xi. Relate  well in form,  scale,  massing  and materials  to the canal  and those  designated 
heritage  assets  on the east side of the canal,  as well as seeking  to conserve  or enhance 
the appearance  of the canal  Conservation  Area 
xii. Take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and Waterfront  Strategic 
Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement   
Reasoned  Justification 
32.12  This site is located  in a sensitive  historic  valley  setting  with an historic  urban  industrial 
townscape  character  and mature  regenerated  woodland  on the site of former  19thcentury  housing. 
It offers opportunities  to create  a canal  frontage  that respects  the historic  buildings  opposite  on 
the Weavers  Wharf  development,  retain  and frame  the visual  line of the valley  setting  and 
historic  Park Lane  and enhance  the existing  Green  Infrastructure.  The retention  of the building 
to the rear of Matalan  should  be investigated  as the loss of this feature  would  despoil  Park Lane 
of its industrial  character  which  would  thus harm  the setting  of the adjacent  heritage  assets  to 
the north  of the site. As a large  recently  vacated  site, it has a negative  impact  on the town  centre 
where  it can be viewed  from Weavers  Wharf.  Redevelopment  of this site will bring  with it 
increased  surveillance  of the canal  towpath  which  is currently  hidden  from view. A footbridge 
would  help to extend  the town  centre  across  the canal  and revitalise  this area of 
Kidderminster . Footings  for the bridge  have  been  provided  as part of the Weavers  Wharf 
development  opposite.  Any new bridge  should  reflect  and complement  the existing  character 
and quality  of the historic  environment  adjacent  to the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal, 
respond  to the setting  of any Listed  Buildings  and ensure  no detrimental  impact  to users  of the 
canal  corridor . New links to the canal  towpath  should  be accompanied  by appropriate  signage 
and route  finding  for pedestrians  and cyclists.  The Canal  and River  Trust’s agreement  will be 
required  for any such  crossing. 
Wyre Forest  District 
213 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town   Rock  Works  (0.36ha)  22 dwellings  2021-26 
32.13  The Rock  Works on Park Lane  is a 
redundant  19thcentury  carpet  factory  building.  It is 
on the Local  Heritage  List and is in a bad state  of 
repair . Its principal  feature  is the roof and its north 
lights.  It is built into the cliff face.  Steep  stone  steps 
that are cut into the hillside  connect  Rock  Works 
with the Park Street  Industrial  Estate  above.  The 
southern  part of the site consists  of woodland 
which  has regenerated  on the site of Victorian 
terraced  dwellings. 
Policy  SA.K6  - Rock  Works 
The site is allocated  for residential  use. Development  of the site should  ensure  that: 
i. The buildings  on the site are refurbished  and brought  back  into active  use 
ii. A full ecological  appraisal  of the site including  a bat survey  is undertaken  prior to the 
refurbishment  and the development  is carried  out in accordance  with its recommendation 
iii. The opportunity  to supplement  the regenerated  woodland  on the southern  part of the 
site is realised  as part of the development  scheme 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.14  The site has approval  for conversion  to 22 apartments. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 214 Kidderminster  Town 32 Kidderminster  Fire Station  (0.37ha)  20 dwellings  2026-31 
32.15  Kidderminster  Fire Station  has relocated 
to the Wyre Forest  Emergency  Services  Hub on 
Stourport  Road.  This has freed  up this town  centre 
site for conversion  of the main  building  and 
redevelopment  to the rear for residential  use. 
  
  
Policy  SA.K7  - Kidderminster  Fire Station 
This site is suitable  for a mixed  conversion/new  build  residential  scheme. 
i. The main  building  should  be retained  and converted 
ii. The close  proximity  to Caldwall  Tower  requires  a bespoke  approach  to the design  of 
any replacement  buildings.  There  will be a need  for careful  consideration  of the layout, 
design,  scale  and materials  used  within  any development  to ensure  that the 
development  contributes  positively  to this sensitive  location 
iii. Depending  on the significance  of archaeological  heritage  assets  found,  development 
may not be feasible  on certain  parts  of the site 
iv. The grassy  bank  along  the River  Stour  should  be retained  to reduce  the impact  of 
development  on protected  species  such  as otter. Natural  cover  should  be increased 
in this area to encourage  wildlife 
v. Proposals  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and 
Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
vi. Proposals  should  take into account  any potential  flooding  issues  on site and incorporate 
appropriate  mitigation  measures 
Wyre Forest  District 
215 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Reasoned  Justification 
32.16  Kidderminster  Fire Station  lies within  the Green  Street  Conservation  Area  adjacent  to 
Caldwall  Tower  (Grade  II*) and the River  Stour  Local  Wildlife  Site. Much  of the site is also within 
flood  zone  2. The rear of the site is also affected  by flood  zone  3 (defended).  The facade  of the 
fire station  is included  on the local heritage  list. It was built in 1929  and designed  by the borough 
engineer . The adjacent  single  octagonal  tower  of Caldwall  Hall is the surviving  fragment  of a 
fortified  medieval  manor  house  and is Kidderminster ’s oldest  building  apart  from St Mary’ s 
Church.  It sat in a deer park and later formal  gardens  (of which  the development  site forms  a 
part).  There  is a high probability  of buried  archaeological  remains  on the site. 
Boucher  Building  Green  Street   (0.04ha)  10 dwellings  2026-31 
32.17  The Boucher  Building  fronts  Green  Street 
with the Morrisons'  supermarket  car park to the 
rear. It is located  within  the Green  Street 
Conservation  Area  and is on the Local  Heritage 
List. It sits adjacent  to the River  Stour  with the 
entire  site within  Flood  zone  2. 
       
Policy  SA.K8  -  Boucher  Building  Green  Street 
The building  is proposed  for residential  conversion. 
i. Development  should  take account  of any flood  risk and a site-specific  Flood  Risk 
Assessment  is required 
ii. The development  scheme  should  have  full regard  to the Green  Street  Conservation 
Area  Character  Appraisal 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 216 Kidderminster  Town 32 iii. A bat survey  should  be submitted  as part of any planning  application 
iv. The development  scheme  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and 
Stourport  Urban  and Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure 
Concept  Statement 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.18  This building  fronts  Green  Street  and has been  unused  for a number  of years.  A 
conversion  scheme  would  make  a significant  improvement  to the streetscene.  It is important  to 
retain  this building  as part of the ‘Heritage  Processions’  which  characterise  this area of town 
with former  carpet  buildings  lining  the street  at ‘back  of pavement’.  The ground  floor of the 
building  could  potentially  be used  for cycle/bin  storage/  drying  room  with flats on the upper 
floors.   The Flood  Risk Assessment  should  detail  the possibility  of overtopping,  flood  management 
and warning  and contribution  to defence  maintenance.    
Limekiln  Bridge  (1.15ha)  30 dwellings  2021-26,  50 dwellings  2026-31 
32.19  This site comprises  an engineering  works 
and a Council  owned  parcel  of open  space  with a 
redundant  basketball  court.  The site lies alongside 
the canal  with a supermarket  and car parking  area 
situated  across  the canal.  The site slopes  down 
from Clensmore  Street  to the canal. 
Policy  SA.K9  - Limekiln  Bridge 
The redevelopment  of this area for residential  use should: 
i. Provide  an active  frontage  onto both the canal  and Clensmore  Street 
Wyre Forest  District 
217 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town ii. Be sympathetic  to the character  of the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal 
Conservation  Area  and the setting  of St. Mary’ s Church  and graveyard 
iii. Compensate  for the loss of existing  open  space 
iv. Carefully  consider  layout,  design,  scale  and materials 
v. Enhance  the already  excellent  Green  Infrastructure  connectivity  and retain  mature 
trees  on site 
vi. Take account  of any remediation  and decontamination  required 
vii. Take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and Waterfront  Strategic 
Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.20  A historic  wharf  once  stood  near Limekiln  Bridge  and archaeological  investigation  will 
be required  on this site. Old maps  also show  a chemical  works  on this site together  with rows 
of tiny terraced  housing  fronting   Clensmore  Street.  Compensatory  open  space  will need  to be 
provided  elsewhere  in the area.  Any new development  on this site will be expected  to make  a 
contribution  towards  this. Development  on this prominent  site should  reflect  and complement 
the existing  character  and quality  of the historic  environment  in this locality . 
 Sladen  School  Site  (2.58ha)  36 dwellings  plus school  2021-26 
32.21  Sladen  Middle  School  closed  in July 2007 
and was subsequently  demolished.  There  are 
extensive  playing  fields  on the site which  is 
surrounded  by residential  properties  on all sides. 
The site has 3 distinct  land parcels  with  trees  to 
the boundaries. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 218 Kidderminster  Town 32 Policy  SA.K10  - Sladen  School  Site 
This land is allocated  as a mixed  use site comprising  of a new school  and residential 
development.  Development  should: 
i. Safeguard  land required  for a new 60 place  school  and associated  infrastructure 
ii. Deliver  class  C3 dwelling  houses 
iii. Provide  vehicular  access  from Hurcott  Road  to the new school  and from Medal  Close 
to the new residential  development 
iv. Compensate  for the loss of playing  fields  with alternative  provision  either  on site or 
contribute  to provision  elsewhere 
v. Provide  pedestrian  links through  to Hurcott  Road 
vi. Design  the layout  to maximise  natural  surveillance  throughout   
vii. Retain  and strengthen  the existing  green  infrastructure  network,  in particular  the trees 
along  the Hurcott  Road  frontage   
viii. Take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and Waterfront  Strategic 
Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.22  This site is in the ownership  of Worcestershire  County  Council.  It is proposed  to develop 
it to deliver  a new school  and approximately  36 class  C3 dwellings.  It will be necessary  to ensure 
that both parts  of the scheme  are appropriately  integrated  with each  other  and the neighbouring 
areas.  The role of Green  Infrastructure  in and around  the whole  landholding  will be an important 
component  of this. 
Wyre Forest  District 
219 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Land  at Stourbridge  Road  (10.33ha) 
32.23  This site is allocated  as a green  gap in 
order  to protect  the setting  of Hurcott  Village  and 
the adjacent  Sites  of Special  Scientific  Interest.  No 
built development  will be allowed  on this parcel  of 
land. 
Policy  SA.K1 1 - Land  at Stourbridge  Road   
The land is designated  as a green  gap and will not be released  for development  in order 
to protect  the Hurcott  Pastures  SSSI  and the setting  of the historic   Hurcott  Village 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.24  There  are two Sites  of Special  Scientific  Interest  (SSSIs)  adjacent  to this site. One is 
a wetland  – Hurcott  and Podmore  Pools,  the other  is dry grassland  – Hurcott  Pastures.  The dry 
grassland  SSSI  was designated  after the land was taken  out of the Green  Belt and safeguarded 
for future  housing  development  as an Area of Development  Restraint.  This SSSI  is very sensitive 
to disturbance  and the hydrological  impacts  of developing  on the southern  parcel  would  be 
difficult to mitigate  for. Habitat  deterioration  is also an issue. 
32.25  The only access  to the southern  parcel  would  be from the northern  site across  a dry 
valley  which  separates  the two parcels  as the Highways  Authority  proposes  to stop up Hurcott 
Lane  which  runs alongside  the site to protect  the historic  village  and, more  importantly , protect 
the historic  lane itself from further  damage  by heavy  traffic. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 220 Kidderminster  Town 32 Kidderminster  Ambulance  Station   (0.22ha)  6 dwellings  2021-26 
32.26  The former  site of the ambulance  station 
is now completely  surrounded  by residential  uses.   
Policy  SA.K12  - Kidderminster  Ambulance  Station 
The site is allocated  for residential  development. 
i. Mature  trees  on site should  be retained  and opportunities  taken  to enhance  the green 
infrastructure  network 
ii. Appropriate  ecological  surveys  should  accompany  any planning  application 
iii. Development  should  respect  the scale,  morphology  and materials  of the adjacent 
historic  suburban  character 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.27  This small  site is now surrounded  by residential  development  following  the 
redevelopment  of the Reilloc  Chain  factory  site and a small  well-designed  development  should 
be brought  forward  on this site to complement  recent  development  nearby . 
Wyre Forest  District 
221 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Severn  Grove  Shops   (0.48ha)  12 dwellings  (net)  2021-26 
32.28  This small  site is allocated  for 
redevelopment.  It consists  of a parade  of shops 
with flats over together  with a block  of maisonettes. 
The neighbouring  public  house  is being 
redeveloped  for housing.  Redevelopment  of this 
adjacent  site would  help to improve  the poor urban 
environment  on this estate. 
Policy  SA.K13  - Severn  Grove  Shops 
Development  of this site should: 
i. Provide  replacement  affordable  homes 
ii. Provide  landscaping  to improve  the public  realm 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.29  This site is in the ownership  of The Community  Housing  Group  and is ripe for 
redevelopment  subject  to funding  becoming  available. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 222 Kidderminster  Town 32 Naylor ’s Field,  Sutton  Park  Rise  (1.65ha)  35 dwellings  2026-31 
32.30  This Greenfield  site is surplus  to 
educational  requirements.  It is completely 
surrounded  by residential  development.  There  is 
an existing  access  from Sutton  Park Rise. 
Policy  SA.K14  - Naylor ’s Field,  Sutton  Park  Rise 
This site is allocated  for residential  development.  Development  should: 
i. Retain  and supplement  the existing  late 19th century  hedgerow   which  runs across  the 
centre  of the site to provide  Green  Infrastructure  connectivity  through  and off the site 
out onto the nearby  Rifle Range  SSSI 
ii. Use the existing  access  from Sutton  Park Rise 
iii. Retain  land to the north  of the hedgerow  as public  open  space     
Reasoned  Justification 
32.31  This site is used  for informal  recreation  and local events.  By retaining  the area to the 
rear of the hedgerow  as open  space,  these  functions  could  be continued. 
Wyre Forest  District 
223 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town 164/5  Sutton  Park  Road  (0.72ha)  3 dwellings  2021-26 
32.32  This site consists  of 2 substantial  garden 
plots.  Proposals  have  been  drawn  up to develop 
a small  number  of additional  dwellings.  There  are 
a number  of protected  trees  on the site. 
Policy  SA.K15  - 164/5  Sutton  Park  Road 
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should: 
i. Retain  mature  trees  on site and safeguard  them  during  construction 
ii. Retain  existing  dwellings 
iii. Respect  the character  of surrounding  development  in terms  of plot size, materials  and 
design 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.33  A limited  number  of dwellings  could  be provided  off a single  private  access  road (5 
including  2 retained  dwellings).  This part of Kidderminster  is characterised  by large  dwellings 
in substantial  plots  and any infill development  should  respect  this character . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 224 Kidderminster  Town 32 Land  at Low Habberley   (5.57ha)  124 dwellings  2021-26 
32.34  The arable  field to the north  of Habberley 
Road  opposite  Hillside  Drive  is allocated  for 
residential  development.  It is bounded  by 
Habberley  Road  and the Habberley  Estate  to the 
south,  Habberley  Lane  (leading  to the hamlet  of 
Low Habberley)  to the east and a bridleway  / 
access  to High Habberley  House  to the west.  The 
northern  boundary  is a hedgeline.   
Policy  SA.K16  - Land  at Low Habberley   
This land is allocated  for residential  development.   Development  of the site should  meet   
the following  requirements: 
i. The access  should  be taken  from Habberley  Road 
ii. The existing  hedgerows  and trees  should  be retained  and supplemented  to soften  the 
impact  of development  and provide  biodiversity  net gain 
iii. The development  should  be set back  from the bridleway  to protect  the setting  of High 
Habberley  House 
iv. The rear hedgeline  should  be strengthened  to provide  a new defensible  boundary  to 
the Green  Belt 
v. The scale  and design  of the development  should  be sympathetic  to the character  and 
setting  of Low Habberley 
vi. The impact  of any development  on the nearby  Habberley  Valley Nature  Reserve  and 
Local  Wildlife  Site should  be balanced  out through  biodiversity  net gain 
vii. Proposals  should  specify  how existing  and surrounding  habitats  including  Habberley 
Valley and Eastham’ s Coppice  will be taken  into consideration.  Measures  to protect 
and mitigate  for bats and brown  hare should  also be considered 
Wyre Forest  District 
225 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Reasoned  Justification 
32.35  The site is located  on the NW edge  of Kidderminster ’s urban  area.  The retention  and 
enhancement  of the western  hedgerow  boundary  will allow  for an improved  residential  edge  to 
Habberley  when  seen  from the north  and provide  a strong  defensible  Green  Belt boundary . The 
site has good  access  to local shops  and schools.   
Land  rear of Zortech  Avenue  (1.48ha)  16 pitches  for Gypsies  and Travellers  2021-26 
32.36  This site was formerly  part of the Burlish 
Golf Course  and has been  extensively  tipped  with 
hardcore.  There  was a proposal   to level the site 
for a junior  academy  golf course  in 2016  which 
was never  implemented.  The site was originally 
used  as an overspill  car park.  Access  can be taken 
from the main  drive  off Zortech  Avenue.  It is 
adjacent  to a large  refurbished  industrial  unit and 
adjoins  the Burlish  Top nature  reserve. 
Policy  SA.K17  - Land  rear of Zortech  Avenue 
This land is allocated  as a gypsy  and traveller  site. Development  of the site should  ensure 
that: 
i. Appropriate  buffering  is provided  for the adjacent  Burlish  Top nature  reserve  and to 
screen  the development  from the adjacent  dwellings  on Birchen  Coppice 
ii. Vehicular  access  is taken  from either  Zortech  Avenue  or, if feasible,  from Walter Nash 
Road  West 
iii. The site standards  for Gypsy  and Traveller  pitches  set out in Policy  DM.5  are met 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 226 Kidderminster  Town 32 Reasoned  Justification 
32.37  The allocation  of this site will help to meet  the identified  need  for accommodation  for 
Gypsy  and Traveller  families  in the District  during  the Plan period.  The site is adjacent  to the 
proposed  site for the travelling  showpeople  and it shares  an access  drive  from Zortech  Avenue 
with the neighbouring  allocation.  While  adjacent  to an industrial  unit, it is also close  to a residential 
area with easy  access  to a range  of facilities  including  education.  However , the potential  for a 
separate  access  from Walter Nash  Road  West should  be explored  as this would  provide  a more 
direct  route  for residents  of the site to access  local schools,  shops  and the nearby  play facilities. 
Frank  Stone  Building  Green  Street  (0.32ha)  employment  uses 
32.38  This former  carpet  works  is located  within 
the Green  Street  Conservation  Area  and has been 
empty  for many  years.  It is currently  being 
marketed  for either  commercial  or residential  uses. 
32.39  The building  straddles  the River  Stour . 
There  is an opportunity  to remove  part of the 
building  which  is cantilevered  over the river. River 
corridor  enhancements  will be expected  as part of 
any proposal. 
   
Policy  SA.K18  - Frank  Stone  Building,  Green  Street 
This site is allocated  for employment  uses  (B2, B8 and light industrial).  Any development 
should: 
i. Provide  a positive  relationship  with the river and contribute  to the improvement  of the 
riverside  environment  and enhancement  of the green  infrastructure 
ii. Retain  the existing  building  frontage  having  regard  to the Green  Street  Conservation 
Area  Character  Appraisal  and Management  Plan 
iii. Be of high quality  design  to enhance  the character  of the Conservation  Area 
iv. Address  potential  contamination  and carry  out appropriate  remediation  in order  to 
protect  groundwater 
Wyre Forest  District 
227 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town v. Ensure  that if partial  demolition  is necessary , proportionate  recording  of the building 
and any archaeological  interests  is carried  out 
vi. Ensure  that the design  of the development  satisfactorily  addresses  any potential  flood 
risk 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.40  The Frank  Stone  building  is on the Local  Heritage  List. The front of the building  facing 
onto Green  Street  forms  a strong  frontage  and sense  of enclosure.  To the rear of the site lies 
the Meadow  Mills Industrial  Estate.   
SDF site, Stourport  Road   (4.28ha)  employment  uses 
32.41  Employee  numbers  on this site have  fallen 
dramatically  in recent  years.  It is expected  to come 
forward  for redevelopment  during  the plan period. 
The woodland  immediately  adjoining  the site to 
the north  is classed  as ancient  woodland  and must 
be protected. 
Policy  SA.K19  - SDF site, Stourport  Road 
Any redevelopment  of this site in the Stourport  Road  Employment  Corridor  for light industrial, 
B2 or B8 uses  should: 
i. Provide  a minimum  15m buffer to the ancient  woodland  fronting  Stourport  Road 
ii. Provide  additional  tree planting  along  the road frontage 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 228 Kidderminster  Town 32 Reasoned  Justification 
32.42  The woodland  on Stourport  Road  is a remnant  of the much  larger  Oldington  Wood. It 
is classified  as ancient  woodland  and protected  by an area Tree Preservation  Order . Any 
redevelopment  proposals  will need  to be set back  behind  a minimum  15m buffer from the 
woodland. 
Easter  Park  extension,  Worcester  Road  (2.51ha)  employment  uses 
32.43  This area of grassland  is proposed  for an 
extension  of the employment  units  at Easter  Park.   
Policy  SA.K20  - Easter  Park  Extension,  Worcester  Road 
The land at Worcester  Road  is allocated  for employment  development  (light  industrial,  B2 
and B8). Development  of the site should: 
i. Retain  an area of grassland  around  the units  and screen  the development  from the 
adjacent  dwellings  to the south 
ii. Be accessed  from the existing  roundabout  using  the service  road to the rear of the 
units  alongside  the railway 
iii. Provide  landscaping  along  the A449  and the rail corridor 
iv. Where  feasible,  provide  green  roofs  to create  an attractive  entrance  to the town 
v. Discharge  surface  water  so as not to exacerbate  flooding  issues  to the south 
Wyre Forest  District 
229 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town Reasoned  Justification 
32.44  This area of land acts as a gateway  to Kidderminster  from the Worcester  direction.  It 
is adjacent  to existing  industrial  development  and subject  to high quality  design  and landscaping, 
its development  will help to meet  employment  needs  in the District  over the Plan period . Dwellings 
to the south  will need  to be buffered  from any adverse  impacts  arising  from the development. 
VOSA  Testing  Station  Worcester  Road  (1.75ha)  employment  uses 
32.45  This site lies opposite  the Easter  Park 
extension  site. It is suitable  for redevelopment  for 
employment  uses.  The northern  part of the site is 
used  for commercial  van sales. 
Policy  SA.K21  - VOSA  Testing  Station,  Worcester  Road 
The land currently  occupied  by the vehicle  testing  station  is allocated  for light industrial,  B2 
and B8 uses.  Any redevelopment  of the site should  meet  the following  criteria: 
i. Vehicular  access  should  be taken  from the existing  access  road 
ii. The front of the site should  be landscaped  with native  planting 
iii. Development  should  be compatible  with neighbouring  uses 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.46  This site backs  onto the Roxel  research  station.  Any redevelopment  would  need  to be 
compatible  with this use. This is a large  site with limited  employment  and could,  together  with 
the site opposite,  form a new gateway  into Kidderminster . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 230 Kidderminster  Town 32 Former  Burlish  Golf Course  Clubhouse  site  (1.35ha)  Travelling  Showpeople  site 
32.47  This site contains  the former  club house 
and associated  buildings.  They  have  been  subject 
to arson  attacks  and may require  demolition.  The 
land is allocated  for a travelling  showpeople  site. 
Policy  SA.K22  - Former  Burlish  Golf Course  Clubhouse   
This land is allocated  for development  as a site for travelling  showpeople  subject  to the 
following  requirements: 
i. Access  will be taken  from Zortech  Avenue 
ii. The site should  be landscaped  with native  plants  to provide  screening  from adjacent 
sites 
iii. Arrangements  for drainage  measures  and sewerage  treatment  should  be implemented 
in accordance  with details  submitted  and approved  by the Council 
iv. The scale  of the development  should  meet  the specific  housing  needs  of the existing 
family 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.48  The Council  has been  working  to find a new site for a locally-based  family  of travelling 
showpeople  for several  years.  They  need  to vacate  their current  winter  home.  The allocated 
site is now in the Council's  control   following  the closure  of the Golf Club.  It is considered  to be 
ideal  for the proposed  use as it is adjacent  to industrial  units  but also on the edge  of a residential 
area with easy  access  to education  and other  facilities  required  by the family . The site will be 
Wyre Forest  District 
231 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town used  mainly  in the winter  months  for maintenance  and storage  of fairground  equipment.  The 
family  will also live on the site when  they are not travelling  around  the country . There  is good 
road access  for their long vehicles. 
Land  off Zortech  Avenue  (1.96ha)  employment  uses 
32.49  This land lies adjacent  to the access  drive 
to the former  Burlish  Golf Course  Club House  and 
car park.  It is allocated  for further  employment 
development  as it lies adjacent  to the edge  of the 
South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park. 
Policy  SA.K23  - Land  off Zortech  Avenue   
This site is allocated  for employment  development  (light  industrial,  B2 and B8), subject  to 
the following  requirements: 
i. Development  should  be designed  to minimise  impact  on the neighbouring  nature 
reserve 
ii. Building  heights  should  be a maximum  of 2 storeys  and incorporate  green  roofs  where 
practicable 
iii. Landscaping  of boundaries  with native  planting  will be required  to minimise  impact  on 
the adjacent  nature  reserve,  improve  connectivity  with surrounding  wildlife  corridors 
and provide  biodiversity  net gain 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 232 Kidderminster  Town 32 Reasoned  Justification 
32.50  The site is part of the former  Burlish  Golf Course  which  returned  to local authority 
ownership  in 2018  following  the closure  of the Golf Club.  Land  immediately  to the south  has 
been  transferred  to management  by the Ranger  Service  and will form part of a country  park.  This 
land will act as a green  buffer between  Kidderminster  and Stourport-on-Severn.  The allocation 
offers the opportunity  for a well-designed  scheme  in an edge  of town  location  with direct  access 
to the adjoining  nature  reserve,  while  helping  to meet  employment  needs  in the District  over 
the Plan period. 
South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park 
32.51  The area to the south  of Kidderminster 
Town Centre  provides  many  development 
opportunities.  It is a thriving  mix of businesses  and 
residential  uses  combined  with some  of the most 
important  natural  habitat  in Worcestershire.  In 
recent  years,  large-scale  redevelopment  has begun 
at the former  British  Sugar  site and the former 
Romwire  site. The completion  of the Hoo Brook 
Link Road  has connected  the Stourport  Road 
Employment  Corridor  with the Worcester  Road 
Employment  Corridor  and provided  further 
development  opportunities. 
Policy  SA.K24  - South  Kidderminster  Enterprise  Park  (SKEP) 
Development  proposals  within  the SKEP  area should: 
i. Positively  contribute  to the economic  well-being  of the District 
ii. Ensure  that they are compatible  with neighbouring  areas  and should  not prejudice  the 
operation  and amenity  of existing  employment  in the area 
iii. Enhance  the relationship  between  sites and the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire 
Canal  and the River  Stour  corridor  where  appropriate 
iv. Positively  enhance  the Wilden  Marsh  and Meadows  SSSI  where  appropriate 
v. Ensure  they incorporate  appropriate  remediation,  building  and drainage  design  in order 
to deal with any land contamination 
Wyre Forest  District 
233 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 32 Kidderminster  Town vi. Strengthen  the visual  harmony  of the Stourport  Road  with its strong  tradition  of 
tree-lining  and service  roads  and prominent  set-back  of the building  line 
vii. Safeguard  and promote  the development  of new enterprise  units for start-up  businesses 
viii. Take account  of any flood  risk 
Reasoned  Justification 
32.52  Although  the area of the SKEP  covers  some  natural  features  and Green  Belt land, 
development  will only be permitted  on previously  developed  sites.  The site designation 
lies adjacent  to Wilden  Marsh  and Meadows   SSSI  and the associated  former  settling  ponds 
west of Wilden  Lane.  Impacts  on this land are to be considered  as part of any application  for 
development  and positive  benefits  consistent  with Policy  SP.23 secured  to enhance  this area. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 234 Kidderminster  Town 32 Overview  of Allocated  sites  in Chapter  33: Stourport-on-Severn  (please  refer 
to Policies  Map for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 23, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:8000 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
235 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn Cheapside  (2.20ha)  72 dwellings  plus some  commercial  uses  2026-31 
33.1 This former  manufacturing  site is located 
at the confluence  of the Rivers  Stour  and Severn. 
It contains  a former  vinegar  works  factory , the site 
of gas works  and a former  canal  basin.  Much  of 
the site is in the flood  zone.  It is located  within  the 
Stourport-on-Severn  No.1  Conservation  Area. 
Policy  SA.S1  - Cheapside   
The site is allocated  for a mix of residential  and business  and/or  commercial  development 
which  should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. The Listed  Buildings  and Local  Heritage  List assets  within  the site boundaries  should 
be retained  and enhanced  where  possible.  The most  significant  surviving  elements  of 
the Vinegar  Works,  the Gas Works and the former  canal  basin  (eg: retaining  walls) 
should  be retained  in order  to preserve  some  industrial  characteristics  of the 
Stourport-on-Severn  No.1  Conservation  Area  and these  should  be incorporated  into 
any new development.  The development  must  take into account  the positive  contribution 
made  by the heritage  assets  to the Conservation  Area   
ii. The development  should  incorporate  and enhance  the natural  assets  of the site, 
including  the environment  of the rivers  that surround  the site 
iii. Full regard  should  be had to flood  risk 
iv. Appropriate  remediation  and drainage  should  be incorporated  into the development 
to deal with any contamination 
v. A full assessment  of the existing  non-designated  heritage  assets  on the site together 
with building  recording  to Historic  England  Level  4 is required  to mitigate  for any 
demolition 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 236 Stourport-on-Severn 33 vi. A desk  based  assessment  to assess  the potential  for below  ground  archaeology  should 
be undertaken 
vii. Any redevelopment  should  reflect  the historic  street  pattern  of Cheapside,  the sloping 
path to the River  Severn  towpath  and the location  of the former  basin   
viii. The development  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban 
and Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
ix. The potential  for excavation  of the site of the former  Cheapside  Basin  to create  a 
landscape  feature  associated  with Green  Infrastructure  through  the site from the Rivers 
Severn  and Stour  should  be investigated 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.2 Cheapside  is the site of the oldest  vinegar  brewery  in the county  (built  1798).  Remaining 
buildings  on the site appear  to date from the early-mid-19thcentury . The complex  forms  an 
important  part in the industrial  history  of Stourport,  and the buildings  form important  facades  to 
the river frontage.  This is the only part of the Conservation  Area  with any industrial-related  uses 
remaining.  Proposals  which  retain  the site of the basin  undeveloped,  retain  the Ginnell  and 
repair  the former  Upper  Severn  Bridge  will be encouraged.  The repair  and re-use  of 1&2 
Cheapside  (Grade  II listed  derelict  dwellings)  will help to mitigate  against  the impact  of 
redevelopment  in the adjacent  area.  Careful  removal  of the less significant  elements  of the 
Vinegar  Works may enhance  the remaining  elements  and encourage  their re-use  for alternative 
purposes.  Further  information  on the site can be found  in the Stourport-on-Severn  No.1 
Conservation  Area  Character  Appraisal.   
Wyre Forest  District 
237 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn Swan  Hotel  / Working  Men’ s Club  (1.52ha)  20 dwellings  2026-36 
33.3 This site fronting  Lickhill  Road  comprises 
the refurbished  Swan  Hotel  and car park,  social 
clubs  and their associated  bowling  greens  plus 
Lickhill  Garage.  Much  of the land to the rear of the 
High Street  is underused  and this provides  the 
opportunity  for some  infill development  in a central 
location. 
   
Policy  SA.S2  - Swan  Hotel/W orking  Men's  Club 
Proposals  for this site should  provide  for a mix of uses  including  residential,  commercial 
and leisure.  Development  should: 
i. Enhance  and complement  the adjacent  Conservation  Area 
ii. Remove  the modern  rear extensions  to the Swan  Hotel 
iii. Redevelop  the Lickhill  Road  frontage  whilst  still allowing  rear access  for servicing  for 
shops  on High Street 
iv. Reflect  the grain  and scale  of development  which  has historically  taken  place  to the 
rear of the High Street  with building  heights  lower  than the buildings  within  the 
surrounding  Conservation  Area 
v. Retain  the existing  social  clubs  and their associated  leisure  facilities  and parking 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.4 Proposals  for residential  development  to the rear of the Swan  Hotel  would  improve  the 
streetscene  and provide  easy  access  to facilities  with its central  town  centre  location.  New 
development  here would  enhance  the Conservation  Area.  Removal  of the poor quality  extensions 
to the rear of the Swan  Hotel  will better  reveal  its original  form and construction,  and enhance 
its setting. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 238 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Queens  Road  Shops   (0.37ha)  12 dwellings  (net)  2021-31 
33.5 This site consists  of a parade  of shops  with 
residential  flats above.  It is owned  by The 
Community  Housing  Group. 
Policy  SA.S3  - Queens  Road  Shops   
This site is allocated  for residential  development.  Development  should: 
i. Provide  a mix of dwelling  types  and sizes  to suit the local need 
ii. Provide  additional  landscaping  to link the development  into the wider  green  infrastructure 
provision 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.6 The potential  to relocate  a retail  unit and community  meeting  facility  to the nearby  site 
of the former  Walshes  Community  Centre  is being  investigated.  Additional  dwellings  could  also 
be located  at this site. 
Wyre Forest  District 
239 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn Pearl  Lane  (15.03ha)  250 dwellings  2021-31 
33.7 This Greenfield  site lies on the western 
boundary  of Wyre Forest  District  with Malvern  Hills 
District.  It comprises  two fields  separated  by a 
hedgerow . It has a northern  boundary  with Dunley 
Road  (A451),  an eastern  boundary  with Pearl  Lane 
and a southern  field boundary  adjacent  to New 
Farm  Barns.  The western  boundary  is an 
established  hedgerow  with oak trees. 
Policy  SA.S4  - Pearl  Lane   
This site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Access  should  be taken  from Dunley  Road  and Pearl  Lane 
ii. Additional  boundary  tree planting  should  be provided  along  the northern,  western  and 
southern  boundaries  in particular  to mitigate  the impact  on the rural landscape  and 
screen  the development  from the A451  and Redhouse  Lane 
iii. The design,  layout  and landscaping  of the development  should  be sympathetic  to the 
setting  of the historic  buildings  in Dunley , especially  Dunley  Hall 
iv. The proposed  development  should  be informed  by a full impact  assessment  on any 
below  ground  archaeological  assets  which  should  be included  as part of a Heritage 
Statement  at the planning  application  stage 
v. The development  scheme  should  take into account  the Blackstone  to Astley  Aqueduct 
which  runs north  to south  through  the site 
vi. The public  footpath  alongside  the culverted  watercourse  should  be further  buffered 
from development  to maintain  the views  out into the wider  rural landscape 
vii. No additional  discharge  must  be made  from the development  as there  are issues  of 
surface  water  flooding  on the estate  opposite.  This should  be dealt  with on site by 
SuDS  and integrated  into the wider  green  infrastructure  provision 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 240 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Reasoned  Justification 
33.8 This site gives  the opportunity  to deliver  a high quality  residential  development  with 
significant  areas  of landscaping.   As part of the development,  there  is also the opportunity  to 
potentially  ameliorate  flooding  issues  on the adjoining  development.  The site lies in a 
sustainable  location  with good  access  to local shops,  schools  and bus services.  It is also 
outside  of the Green  Belt. The development  capacity  may be limited  to 250 dwellings  by the 
ability  of local schools  to absorb  the additional  pupil  numbers.  The capacity  may be exceeded 
if information  is provided  to demonstrate  that local highways  and education  capacity  is not 
constrained  and subject  to meeting  all of the other  policy  requirements.  Archaeological  records 
show  evidence  of a Roman  villa in the vicinity  of the site. This may have  an impact  on the 
developable  area. 
Former  Carpets  of Worth (3.31ha)  129 dwellings  2021-26 
33.9 This site is the remaining  parcel  of the much 
larger  former  Bond  Worth carpet  factory  site. The 
northern  part has been  redeveloped  for a 
superstore  and petrol  station.  A new link road over 
the River  Stour  and through  to the Worcester  Road 
has also been  provided  as part of this 
development.  The site is mostly  cleared  but there 
are three  buildings  remaining  which  have  been 
extensively  vandalised. 
Policy  SA.S5  - Former  Carpets  of Worth  
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. The development  should  provide  for residential  uses,  together  with a riverside  ecological 
corridor 
ii. The development  should  be sympathetic  to the Stourport-on-Severn  No.1 Conservation 
Area  and the riverside  setting 
Wyre Forest  District 
241 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn iii. Any development  on the site must  reflect  and complement  the existing  character  and 
quality  of the historic  buildings  to the west,  and specifically  the former  route  leading 
east from Lichfield  Street  towards  the River  Stour  should  be retained 
iv. The site layout  should  provide  a clear  and logical  block  structure  that connects  with 
Lichfield  Street  and provide  private  backs  and public  fronts  to all streets  and spaces 
v. The development  should  take the opportunity  to buffer and enhance  the major  Green 
Infrastructure  corridor  associated  with the River  Stour  and ensure  Green  Infrastructure 
connectivity  with Severn  Road 
vi. Ecological  surveys  will be required  prior to submission  of any planning  application  and 
potential  for habitat  creation  along  the river-bank  should  be investigated  together  with 
opportunities  for creating  nesting  places  for owls and bats and provision  for otters. 
These  ecological  measures  should  be incorporated  into the development  where  feasible. 
vii. The development  should  safeguard  and enhance  the natural  assets  provided  by the 
River  Stour  whilst  taking  into account  and mitigating  against  any flood  risk. Control  of 
drainage  and pollution/SuDS  should  be a priority 
viii. The development  should  incorporate  appropriate  remediation,  building  and drainage 
design  in order  to deal with any land contamination 
ix. The development  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban 
and Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.10  This site previously  had planning  approval  for 159 dwellings  in a scheme  that included 
the refurbishment  of the remaining  buildings.  This permission  lapsed  in 2016.  The 
remaining  buildings  are now so dilapidated  that they can no longer  be refurbished.  Any scheme 
on this site must  be of the highest  quality  as this is a gateway  site into Stourport-on-Severn 
from the new river crossing  immediately  to the south  of the site.  The riverside  should  be an 
integral  part of any proposals.   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 242 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Land  west  of former  school  site Coniston  Crescent   (9.76ha)  200 dwellings  2026-31 
33.11 This land was formerly  part of the Burlish 
Golf Course  which  has ceased  operations  and is 
now returned  to the District  Council’ s ownership.   
Policy  SA.S6  - Land  west  of former  school  site Coniston  Crescent   
This site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Vehicular  access  should  be taken  from the Kingsway  adjacent  to the allotments 
ii. The potential  to provide  parking  for allotment  users  should  be investigated  as part of 
any proposal  and incorporated  in the development  where  feasible 
iii. Opportunities  for pedestrian  links from the site to existing  residential  developments 
should  be explored  to aid permeability  and incorporated  in the development  where 
feasible 
iv. A substantial  landscaping  buffer should  be provided  along  the northern  edge  to form 
a new Green  Belt boundary 
v. The layout  of the development  should  take into account  the development  site to the 
east and impacts  on surrounding  land uses 
vi. Potential  to recreate  an area of acid grassland  on site should  be investigated  and 
incorporated  into the development  where  feasible   
Wyre Forest  District 
243 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn Reasoned  Justification 
33.12  This site would  allow  the ‘rounding-of f’ of the settlement  edge  of Stourport-on-Severn. 
Significant  landscaping  will be required  to limit the impact  on the open  landscape  to the north. 
Acid grassland  habitat  has recently  been  successfully  created  on the neighbouring  Stourport 
Sports  Club site and this land would  also be suitable  for a similar  scheme.  Development  should 
be designed  in conjunction  with the neighbouring  site at Stourport  High School  (Policy  SA.S13) 
County  Buildings  (0.70ha)  40 dwellings  2021-26 
33.13  This triangular  shaped  site on the northern 
edge  of the town centre  has frontages  to Worcester 
Street  to the north,  Foundry  Street  to the east and 
Bewdley  Road  to the west.  Lombard  Street  leads 
up to the southern  corner  of the site. It was home 
to a number  of community  uses,  many  of which 
have  now vacated  the site and relocated  elsewhere 
in the town.  The library , coroners  court  and police 
station  now all occupy  space  in the Civic  Centre. 
The Fire Station  has relocated  to the Wyre Forest 
Emergency  Services  Hub. Stourport  Health  Centre 
is relocating  to a new medical  centre  on Dunley 
Road  in late 2021. 
Policy  SA.S7  - County  Buildings   
This site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. The development  should  reference  the historic  townscape  character  alongside  the 
canal  and its transition  to early  20th Century  residential  development  beyond  the site 
ii. A street  frontage  to Foundry  Street  should  be reintroduced  and its scale,  form and 
massing  should  respect  the scale  and orientation  of the Listed  Buildings  lining  Foundry 
Street 
iii. Development  on the site should  be sympathetic  to the adjacent  Staffordshire  and 
Worcestershire  Canal  Conservation  Area 
iv. The design  of the site should  address  differences  in levels  between  Worcester  Street 
(higher  level)  and Lombard  Street 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 244 Stourport-on-Severn 33 v. The development  should  take the opportunity  to enhance  existing  Green 
Infrastructure  permeability  through  the site and connect  with the River  Stour  and 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  Local  Wildlife  Sites'  GI corridors 
vi. Building  recording  is required  prior to any demolition  as the building  is on the Historic 
Environment  Record 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.14  This triangular  site would  be ideal  for a redevelopment  for residential  uses  as it is now 
surrounded  by housing  on two sides  and is located  in the town  centre. 
Parsons  Chain  (2.91ha)  100 dwellings  plus care home  2026-31 
33.15  This site was a former  chain  making 
factory . The site was cleared  of buildings  around 
2008.  It is dominated  by the former  railway 
embankment  that forms  its eastern  boundary . This 
was previously  safeguarded  as a route  for the 
Stourport  Relief  Road.  It abuts  the Hartlebury 
Common  SSSI  at its southern  tip. Natural 
woodland  has regenerated  along  the length  of the 
former  railway  line. The site has most  recently 
been  used  as a storage  compound  for the 
Birmingham  Pipeline  Resilience  Project. 
   
Policy  SA.S8  - Parsons  Chain 
This site is allocated  for residential  development  including  care home  (Class  C2), which 
should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. The layout  of the development  should  take account  of the adjacent  employment  uses 
to ensure  that any development  does  not prejudice  their viability 
Wyre Forest  District 
245 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn ii. The Grade  II listed  house  to the NW of the site should  be buffered  from any development 
by additional  landscaping.  Building  heights  on the new development  should  respect 
the setting  of this Listed  Building 
iii. The railway  embankment  should  be retained  as an important  green  corridor  and 
recreational  route 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.16  Further  ecological  appraisal  of this site is set out in the evidence  base  for the Plan. 
The railway  embankment  has been  safeguarded  as the route  of the Stourport  Relief  Road  for 
many  years.  This scheme  is no longer  in Worcestershire  County  Council's  transport  plan.  The 
silver  birch  woodland  along  the top of the embankment  is important  as both a wildlife  corridor 
and a recreational  route  and helps  to deflect  footfall  from the more  sensitive  adjacent  SSSI  at 
Hartlebury  Common.   
Baldwin  Road   (1.75ha)  87-92  dwellings  2021-26 
33.17  This site has had a number  of planning 
approvals  for residential  development  (totalling  72 
dwellings)  and is made  up of several  land parcels. 
A masterplan  has been  provided  showing  how the 
various  planning  approvals  / applications  link 
together  to form a comprehensive  redevelopment 
plan.  The site contains  a number  of commercial 
uses,  many  of which  have  now ceased 
operations.  Proposals  are being  drawn  up by 
the developer  to bring  forward  these  remaining 
parcels  with the potential  to provide  a further  15 - 
20 dwellings.  The site is bounded  by the 
Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  and 
towpath  to the north-  west and Baldwin  Road  forms 
the eastern  boundary . Rear  gardens  of dwellings 
in the Gilgal  Conservation  Area  abut the western 
boundary .  
Policy  SA.S9  - Baldwin  Road   
This site is allocated  for residential  development. 
i. The affordable  housing  thresholds  will be applied  pro-rata  to the entire  site 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 246 Stourport-on-Severn 33 ii. The development  should  avoid  demolition  of the historic  cottages  at 6 & 7 Baldwin 
Road  and instead  incorporate  these  into the scheme,  including  their curtilage  and 
access 
iii. The development  should  retain  and enhance  the area of open  space  and integrate  the 
scrub  and woodland   into the overall  residential  development 
iv. Green  Infrastructure  connections  should  be provided  throughout  the site to connect 
into the wider  network 
v. Links  from the site onto the adjacent  canal  towpath  for walking  and cycling  trips into 
Stourport-on-Severn  town  centre  and further  afield  should  be provided 
vi. Proposals  should  take into consideration  the Kidderminster  and Stourport  Urban  and 
Waterfront  Strategic  Development  Corridor  Green  Infrastructure  Concept  Statement   
vii. A holistic  drainage  strategy  is required  for the entire  site  
viii. The development  should  ensure  that buildings  front onto Baldwin  Road  where  possible 
ix. The development  should  not have  an adverse  impact  on either  the Gilgal  Conservation 
Area  or the Staffordshire  and Worcestershire  Canal  Conservation  Area 
x. The development  should  incorporate  appropriate  remediation,  building  and drainage 
design  to deal with any potential  contamination  issues 
Reasoned  Justification 
It is important  that this site is dealt  with holistically  and does  not come  forward  for development 
in a piecemeal  fashion.  Planning  approval  is in place  for the majority  of the site with a total of 
72 dwellings  approved  under  several  different  applications. 
Wyre Forest  District 
247 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn Worcester  Road  Car Sales  (southern  part)  (0.30ha)  15 dwellings  2026-31 
33.18  This site is located  on the main  Worcester 
Road.  To the north  of the site is a car sales 
business.  To the west and south  there  are 
residential  uses.  A large  electricity  sub-station 
occupies  the land opposite.  A new development 
here would  improve  the streetscene. 
Policy  SA.S10  - Worcester  Road  Car Sales  (southern  part)   
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should: 
i. Retain  and enhance  existing  screening  along  the southern  boundary 
ii. Ensure  that development  fronts  onto Worcester  Road 
iii. Incorporate  appropriate  remediation,  building  and drainage  design  in order  to deal with 
any land contamination 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.19  This site contains  a number  of run-down  buildings  including  the former  canteen  building 
from the Stourport  Power  Station . They  are in a poor state  of repair  and previous  proposals  for 
redevelopment  for employment  uses  were  found  to be unviable.   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 248 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Four  Acres  Caravan  Park  (2ha) 
33.20  Land  at Worcester  Road  is allocated  as 
a caravan  site. Previous  Local  Plans  allocated  the 
land as an Area  of Development  Restraint.  It is 
occupied  by two caravan  sites - Four Acres  and 
Greenlawns.  It is adjacent  to Hartlebury  Common 
SSSI.   
Policy  SA.S1 1 - Four  Acres  Caravan  Park   
The land is allocated  as a caravan  park: 
i. If, in the future,  the use of the land as a caravan  park ceases,  the site will be released 
for residential  redevelopment 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.21  There  are over 100 caravans  on the sites - most  of them  are used  as permanent 
residences  which  are licensed  for 11.5 month  occupancy . If the site is developed  for housing 
in the future,  there  would  be a greatly  reduced  number  of dwellings  compared  to the current 
number  of mobile  homes  as ecological  constraints  would  limit development  in the areas  nearest 
to Hartlebury  Common. 
Wyre Forest  District 
249 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn Land  at 3 Sandy  Lane  Titton  (0.32ha)  10 dwellings  2021-26 
33.22  This site is located  on the edge  of Sandy 
Lane  Industrial  Estate  and is very near to 
Hartlebury  Common  and Hillditch  Coppice  SSSI. 
The site was previously  used  as a scrap  yard.  The 
house  on the site is still occupied  and was part of 
the original  Sands  Farm.   Some  of the original 
outbuildings  still remain.  It was previously  allocated 
for employment  as part of the Sandy  Lane 
Industrial  Estate.  A public  footpath  runs along  the 
eastern  site boundary 
   
   
Policy  SA.S12  - Land  at 3 Sandy  Lane  Titton   
The site is allocated  for residential  development: 
i. Development  should  be sensitively  designed  so as to have  no negative  impacts  on 
SSSI.  Thick  hedges  should  be retained  around  site with non-native  species  replaced 
with tall and dense  native  ones  so as to minimise  light spillage 
ii. If possible,  the roadside  barn should  be considered  for retention  as a bat roost.  Full 
bat activity  surveys  will be required  to establish  how bats use the wider  site. These 
can then be used  to inform  site layout,  density  and lighting    
Reasoned  Justification 
33.23  This site is adjacent  to residential  development  and a well-designed   low density  scheme 
would  be suitable  at this location.  There  is already  a dwelling  on the site.  
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 250 Stourport-on-Severn 33 School  site Coniston  Crescent  (4.08ha)  109 dwellings  2021-26 
33.24  This former  school  site is surplus  to 
education  requirements. 
   
Policy  SA.S13  - School  site Coniston  Crescent   
This site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Vehicular  access  should  be taken  from the Kingsway  adjacent  to the allotments  or 
from Coniston  Crescent 
ii. The existing  trees  on the site should  be supplemented  to develop  a buffer between 
the existing  dwellings  on Coniston  Crescent  and the new development 
iii. An ecological  appraisal  should  be submitted  as part of any future  planning  application 
and measures  for the protection  and enhancement  of ecological  interests  should  be 
incorporated  in the development   
Reasoned  Justification 
33.25  This site is surplus  to educational  requirements.  It was, until recently , used  as a sixth 
form block  by the neighbouring  Stourport  High School.  A new sixth form block  has been  provided 
elsewhere  on site. The playing  fields  were  part of the provision  for Burlish  Middle  School  which 
closed  following  the Wyre Forest  schools'  reorganisation  in 2007.  The High School  has in excess 
of the playing  pitch  requirement  and also has agreement  to use the Stourport  Sports  Club 
Wyre Forest  District 
251 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn facilities  on the adjacent  land.  A major  rebuilding  of the High School  is required  and the sale of 
this site will help towards  the funding.   Development  should  be designed  in conjunction  with the 
neighbouring  site (see Policy  SA.S6) 
Firs View Yard Wilden  Lane  (0.41ha)  4 pitches  for Gypsies  and Travellers 
33.26  This site lies partly  within  the Wilden 
Marsh  and Meadows  SSSI  and is adjacent  to the 
River  Stour  floodplain  SSSI.  Most  of the site lies 
within  flood  zones  2 or 3. It is currently  in use as 
a gypsy  site with inhabited  caravans.  A vehicle 
storage  and reclamation  business  is run from the 
yard.  Much  of the site is naturally  regenerated  wet 
woodland  which  is dominated  by alder , silver  birch 
and willow . This allocation  will regularise  the use. 
Policy  SA.S14  - Firs View Yard Wilden  Lane   
The land is allocated  as a private  gypsy  site for 4 pitches  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Measures  should  be put in place  to prevent  surface  water  and pollutants  washing  off 
the yard into the surrounding  highly  sensitive  habitat 
ii. Fencing  around  the yard should  be retained  and maintained 
iii. The number  of pitches  should  be restricted  to 4 and they should  be located  along  the 
edge  of the site nearest  to the road which  lies outside  the floodplain 
iv. External  lighting  should  be restricted  to protect  light sensitive  habitats 
v. No trees  are to be removed  from the site boundary 
vi. A full ecological  survey  will be required  to inform  the site layout  and recommend 
biodiversity  enhancements.  This should  include  a full bat survey 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 252 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Reasoned  Justification 
33.27  A carefully  controlled  change  of use can deliver  significant  improvements  to the site 
and enhance  the SSSI.  This allocation  regularises  an existing  use. No further  caravan  pitches 
should  be provided  on this site as they are classed  as 'Highly  Vulnerable'  in the floodplain. 
Employment  Allocations 
North  of Wilden  Lane  Industrial  Estate  (0.22ha)  employment  development 
33.28  This site has a certificate  of lawfulness  for 
open  storage  not associated  with agriculture.  The 
site is formally  allocated  as part of the Wilden 
Industrial  Estate  employment  area. 
   
Policy  SA.S15  - North  of Wilden  Lane  Industrial  Estate   
The land is allocated  for employment  uses  (light  industrial  Classes  B2 and B8) which  should 
meet  the following  requirements: 
i. The access  should  be taken  from the existing  access  serving  Wilden  Pool 
ii. Additional  tree screening  should  be provided  around  the site 
iii. Any future  buildings  on the site should  be limited  in height  to prevent  visual  intrusion 
into views  across  the Stour  Valley 
iv. Surface  water  run-of f, noise  and lighting  should  be carefully  controlled  to protect  the 
adjacent  River  Stour  Flood  Plain  SSSI 
v. Trees on the site must  be protected  as they form part of the River  Stour  ecological 
corridor 
Wyre Forest  District 
253 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn vi. A detailed  ecological  survey  will be required  to inform  any proposals  for further 
development  on the site 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.29  This site has had a certificate  of lawfulness  for open  storage  since  2005  and is part of 
the wider  Wilden  Industrial  Estate  employment  area.  This allocation  regularises  the situation. 
Wilden  Lane  Industrial  Estate   (0.34ha)  employment  development 
33.30  There  is a large  vacant  plot adjacent  to 
the main  entrance  to the industrial  estate  which  is 
safeguarded  as a potential  expansion  plot for the 
neighbouring  firm.  This site is located  opposite  a 
row of cottages  included  on the Local  Heritage  List 
and sits within  the plain  of the River  Stour . 
   
Policy  SA.S16  - Wilden  Lane  Industrial  Estate   
This site is allocated  for employment  development  (light  industrial,  B2 and B8) which  should 
meet  the following  requirements: 
i. Any development  of this site should  contribute  positively  to this location  through  careful 
consideration  of the layout,  design,  scale  and materials  used  in its construction 
ii. Development  should  be well-screened  from the residential  dwellings  opposite  on Wilden 
Lane 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 254 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Reasoned  Justification 
33.31  This site is the last remaining  unused  parcel  on the industrial  estate.  As the gateway 
site, the design  should  be carefully  considered. 
Other  Allocations 
Minster  Road  Outdoor  Sports  Area 
33.32  The Council  will continue  to safeguard  an area north-west  of Minster  Road, 
Stourport-on-Severn  for outdoor  sports  use. This 
area lies within  the Green  Belt and has an 
important  function  in terms  of sports  facilities  as 
well as preventing  Kidderminster  and 
Stourport-on-Severn  from merging  together . 
   
Policy  SA.S17  - Minster  Road  Outdoor  Sports  Area 
i. Proposals  for the development  of outdoor  sports  facilities  will be encouraged  within 
this area subject  to compatibility  with Green  Belt and landscape  and nature  conservation 
policies. 
ii. Proposals  will be delivered  via developer  contributions  and other  funding  sources  and 
will be informed  by the Playing  Pitch  Strategy  and Built Sports  Facilities  Strategy . 
Reasoned  Justification 
33.33   Approximately  77 hectares  of Green  Belt land between  Kidderminster  and 
Stourport-on-Severn  will be safeguarded  for outdoor  sports  and recreation.  Until 2016,  much 
of the site was in use as a golf course.  The site returned  to local authority  ownership  in June 
Wyre Forest  District 
255 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 33 Stourport-on-Severn 2018.  The Wyre Forest  Golf Facility  Review  (2019)  sets out why this course  is considered  to 
be surplus  to requirements.  Parts  of the site have  now been  brought  under  management  by the 
Council’ s ranger  service  as part of a long term vision  to create  a Country  Park.  Part of the site 
will be managed  as an extension  to the adjacent  Burlish  Top Nature  Reserve.  The land has 
been  made  available  for public  access  with footpaths,  signage,  gates  and fencing.  Cattle  have 
also been  brought  in to graze  the wildflower  meadow . A proposal  to develop  a 3.24km  cycling 
route  on land to the south  of Kingsway  is also being  discussed  with British  Cycling.  Any funding 
secured  would  be match  funded  from S106  contributions.  There  are also plans  to create  a new 
area of woodland  on 10 ha in conjunction  with the Woodland  Trust. A visitor  car park has been 
provided  adjacent  to the Kingsway . Existing  sports  facilities  include  a number  of football  pitches 
adjacent  to Minster  Road  and the extensive  facilities  at Stourport  Sports  Club including  netball 
courts  (some  under  cover)  hockey/football  pitches  (artificial  grass  pitches),  cycling  track  and 
athletics  tracks. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 256 Stourport-on-Severn 33 Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  34: Bewdley  (please  refer  to Policies 
Map for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 23, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:3500 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
257 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 34 Bewdley Bewdley  Fire Station   (0.19ha)  mixed  use with 6 dwellings  2021-26 
34.1  The site of Bewdley  Fire Station  and the 
vacant  plot to the rear is allocated  for a foodstore 
with residential   apartments  above.  This site is 
located  in the centre  of the Conservation  Area  and 
is surrounded  by Listed  Buildings  and town  centre 
car parking.  Part of the land was formerly  occupied 
by the medical  centre  which  has relocated  to a 
new building  on part of the Dog Lane  car park. 
Policy  SA.B1  - Bewdley  Fire Station   
This site is allocated  for a foodstore  and residential  development  which  should  meet  the 
following  requirements: 
i. The development  should  address  and provide  betterment  to flood  risk. Part of this site 
is located  in flood  zone  3 (defended  by demountable  barriers)  and flood  zone  2 
(undefended).  There  should  be no habitable  rooms  at ground  floor level.  Contributions 
to flood  defence  maintenance  / improvements  and flood  warning  may be required.  A 
site-specific  Flood  Risk Assessment  should  determine  levels  with Climate  Change 
allowances  and take into account  defence  overtopping  scenarios 
ii. The development  should  be sympathetic  to nearby  Heritage  Assets  including 
the Conservation  Area  and Listed  Buildings 
iii. Development  on the site should  utilise  the change  in levels  across  the site to reduce 
the overall  height  of the built form,  so that any impact  on designated  assets  on the 
opposite  side of Dog Lane  is reduced  to a minimum. 
iv. The impact  of development  on views  across  the town  from the north,  towards  the 
church  tower , and across  the town  from the Bridge  should  be analysed  and used  to 
determine  the form of any new buildings  on the site. 
v. A programme  of archaeological  works  will be required  including  below  ground 
archaeological  investigations.  Archaeological  assessment  should  accompany  or be 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 258 Bewdley 34 incorporated  into a Heritage  Statement  submitted  with the planning  application  to 
identify  the significance  of on-site  assets  that may be affected  and to assess  the impact 
of development  on them  and their settings. 
Reasoned  Justification 
34.2 Redevelopment  of this vacant  site will need  to be sympathetically  designed  to fit in with 
the surrounding  Conservation  Area  and the many  listed  buildings.  As a town  centre  plot, it is a 
very sustainable  location  to redevelop  for residential  uses  and an element  of retail  on the ground 
floor. 
Stourport  Road  Triangle  (3.35ha)  100 dwellings  2021-26 
34.3 This triangular  shaped  field is currently  used 
for animal  grazing  and was formerly  in arable  use. 
The site is allocated  for approximately  100 homes, 
with access  from Stourport  Road,  public  open 
space,  landscaping  and planting  and 
pedestrian/cycle  links to Bewdley  town  centre. 
Policy  SA.B2  - Stourport  Road  Triangle   
The land is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Vehicular  access  should  be taken  from Stourport  Road 
ii. The northern  part of the site adjacent  to the Severn  Valley Railway  viaduct  should 
remain  as open  space  with no built development  as this is the site of the former  walled 
garden  (non-designated  heritage  asset) 
Wyre Forest  District 
259 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 34 Bewdley iii. The development  should  respect  the setting  of the locally  listed  viaduct  (northern 
boundary)  and coach  house  and barn (to west of site) 
iv. The development  should  be designed  to minimise  any adverse  impact  on both the 
Severn  Valley Railway  and Bewdley  Conservation  Area.  Building  heights  should  be 
restricted  to the equivalent  of 2 storeys  to minimise   impact  on views  from/to  surrounding 
heritage  assets 
v. Enhanced  green  infrastructure  should  be provided  alongside  the Riddings  Brook  with 
a buffer strip provided  alongside  the brook 
vi. A noise  survey  should  be undertaken  to establish  existing  background  noise  levels 
across  the site and to mitigate  noise  impact  from road traffic.  Should  the findings  of 
the survey  indicate  that these  may adversely  impact  upon  the amenity  of new residents, 
then measures  should  be incorporated  within  the development  to mitigate  against  this 
vii. Hedgerows  should  be protected  and supplemented,  especially  along  the northern 
boundary  to promote  connectivity  to nearby  woodland 
Reasoned  Justification 
34.4 This site lies opposite  the town's  leisure  centre  and the adjacent  schools.  It also has 
easy  access  by foot to the town  centre  shops  and medical  facilities.  The site is in a sustainable 
location  and can help meet  the housing  requirement  for Bewdley . It has good  access  to the 
wider  footpath  network  and surrounding  open  countryside.  The restriction  imposed  on building 
height  would  still allow  for a third storey  within  the roof space  if required  but will not 
impact  adversely  on the wider  landscape  and the setting  of the Conservation  Area  and 
key heritage  assets. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 260 Bewdley 34 Catchem’ s End  (3.26ha)  80 dwellings  2021-26 
34.5 The site is allocated  for approximately  80 
dwellings.  The area nearest  to the roundabout  will 
be kept free of development  to protect  the 
openness  of the landscape  at this location.  The 
site is bounded  by a sandstone  wall along  the 
length  of Kidderminster  Road. 
Policy  SA.B3  - Catchem's  End  
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. Access  will be taken  from Kidderminster  Road.  This access  should  not obstruct  or cause 
loss of the existing  layby  as this provides  residential  parking  and a pull-in  for bus 
services.  Part of the existing  boundary  wall should   be removed  only in order  to 
provide  the required  visibility  splay  and access  into the site. Any trees  that are removed 
to facilitate  site access  should  be replaced  by new tree planting  on site 
ii. The area nearest  the roundabout  should  be left undeveloped  with appropriate  green 
and blue infrastructure  to retain  an open  aspect  and help soften  the visual  impact  of 
the development  from wider  views  within  the Green  Belt 
iii. An appropriate  play area should  be provided  as part of the open  space  provision 
iv. The site boundaries  should  be buffered  and enhanced  to benefit  Green  Infrastructure 
connectivity . The mature  broadleaved  trees  along  the site boundaries  should  be retained 
where  possible  to help screen  the development 
v. Building  heights  should  be limited  to 2 – 2.5 storeys  to minimise  any detrimental  impact 
on the setting  of All Saints  Wribbenhall  and Churchyard  (Grade  II Listed) 
vi. A noise  survey  should  be undertaken  to establish  existing  background  noise  levels 
across  the site and to mitigate  noise  impact  from road traffic. Should  the findings  of 
Wyre Forest  District 
261 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 34 Bewdley the survey  indicate  that these  may adversely  impact  upon  the amenity  of new residents, 
then measures  should  be incorporated  within  the development  to mitigate  against  this 
vii. The possibility  of providing  a footpath/cycle  link to rear of Lodge  Close  through  the wet 
woodland  should  be explored  and facilitated  through  this development,  if feasible.  This 
would  connect  the new housing  with the wider  footpath  network 
Reasoned  Justification 
34.6 This development  will maintain  the parkland  setting  at this gateway  into Bewdley . It will 
provide  opportunities  to link into the wider  footpath  network.  A robust  Green  Belt boundary  is 
formed  by the surrounding  road network.  The site is in a sustainable  location  and can help meet 
the housing  requirement  for Bewdley . Planning  contributions  from this development  will help to 
bring  forward  improvements  to the adjoining  site to the rear of Lodge  Close. 
Land  South  of Habberley  Road   (1.71ha)  41 dwellings  2021-26 
34.7 This site consists  of paddocks  and is 
bounded  by the Habberley  Road  (B4190)  to the 
north,  dwellings  on New Road  to the west and the 
A456  to the south.  To the east lie the grounds  of 
a hotel.  A dwelling  and its associated  outbuildings 
are situated  in the south  western  corner  of the site.  
The site is at a lower  level than the A456.  An 
electricity  substation  is immediately  adjacent  to 
the south-east  corner  of the site.  
Policy  SA.B4   Land  south  of Habberley  Road   
The site is allocated  for residential  development  which  should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 262 Bewdley 34 i. The development  should  respect  the scale,  morphology  and materials  of the adjacent 
historic  suburban  character 
ii. The site access  is to be taken  from Habberley  Road  with the existing  trees/hedgerow 
retained  along  this northern  boundary  except  where  removal  is required  for a visibility 
splay 
iii. Well established  trees  and hedgerows  on the site should  be retained/supplemented 
and new planting  should  be extended  north  to connect  with the hedgerow  along  the 
B4190  and provide  screening  of the development  from the hotel  grounds.  The 
development  should  provide  robust  landscaping  to the eastern  boundary 
iv. The potential  to open  up the existing  highway  drain  to form part of the Green 
Infrastructure  provision  should  be explored  as part of the development  proposals  and 
implemented,  if feasible 
v. Provision  of a new footpath  connecting  the development  to Kidderminster  Road  should 
be explored  as part of the development  proposals  and implemented,  if feasible 
Reasoned  Justification 
34.8 This site will have  a substantial  area of green  infrastructure  running  along  its eastern 
edge.  This will both help to mark  the new Green  Belt edge  and provide  an area of green  space 
that could  readily  absorb  any potential  surface  water  flow. The site is in a sustainable  location 
and can help meet  the housing  requirement  for Bewdley . 
  
Wyre Forest  District 
263 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 34 Bewdley   
Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  35: Previously  Developed  Sites  in the 
Green  Belt (Please  refer  to Policies  Map for further  information) 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 23, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:17000 @ A1
West Midland Safari 
and Leisure Park
Cursley Distribution Park
Rushock Trading Estate
SA.PDL
SA.PDL
SA.PDL
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 264 Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 35 Policy  SA.PDL  - Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 
There  are a number  of sites that are considered  to be 'Previously  Developed  Sites'  in the 
Green  Belt which  lie within  Wyre Forest  District.  The largest  of these  sites have  site specific 
policies  which  identify  acceptable  uses  within  these  locations. 
Rushock  Trading  Estate  (14.74ha) 
Within  the Previously  Developed  area of Rushock  Trading  Estate,  limited  infilling  or 
redevelopment  for employment  uses  (light  industrial,  B2 and B8) will be permitted. 
West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park  (WMSLP)  (92ha) 
Within  the Previously  Developed  area of WMSLP  limited  infilling  or redevelopment  proposals 
that support  and enhance  the park's  operations  as a leisure  and tourism  destination  will be 
permitted. 
Cursley  Distribution  Park  (9.98ha) 
Within  the Previously  Developed  area of Cursley  Distribution  Park,  limited  infilling  or 
redevelopment  for employment  uses  (light  industrial,  B2 and B8) will be permitted. 
Proposals  for other  Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 
In order  to protect  the openness  of the Green  Belt, windfall  development  proposals  for 
Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt should: 
i. Contribute  to the achievement  of the objectives  for the use of land in the Green  Belt 
ii. Not exceed  the height  of the existing  buildings  and other  structures  and trees 
iii. Not give rise to off-site  infrastructure  problems 
Overall  Design  Criteria  for any Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 
Design  and landscaping  of development  should  seek  to minimise  the impact  on the Green 
Belt through: 
i. Using  sensitive  materials  and colours. 
ii. Providing  extensive  landscaping  and tree planting  to screen  boundaries,  where 
appropriate. 
For other  previously  developed  sites  in the Green  Belt applications  for development  will 
be considered  against  this policy  framework  and the rest of the policies  in the plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
265 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 35 Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt Rushock  Trading  Estate 
Area:  14.74ha  gross  (approx.) 
35.1 Rushock  Trading  Estate  is a former  military  site within  the Green  Belt. It is located  in 
close  proximity  to Hartlebury  Trading  Estate  and is accessed  from the A442  Kidderminster  – 
Droitwich  road.   The estate  is a thriving  business  area and is owned  by Hovi Developments 
who have  recently  spent  money  refurbishing  and upgrading  the facilities  within  the estate 
boundaries.  As a Previously  Developed  Site in the Green  Belt, the estate  benefits  from the 
flexibility  that the planning  policy  framework  provides,  and this enables  the re-use  and 
redevelopment  of sites within  the curtilage  to continue,  subject  to proposals  being  appropriate 
in terms  of impact  on the Green  Belt. 
  
West Midland  Safari  and Leisure   Park  (WMSLP) 
Area:  92ha  gross  (approx.) 
35.2 The West Midland  Safari  and Leisure  Park 
is one of the largest  tourist  attractions  within  the 
District.   The Park is located  entirely  within  the 
West Midlands  Green  Belt and is situated  in a 
strategic  gap between  the two towns  of 
Kidderminster  and Bewdley . The park is not only 
important  locally  but is a regional  and national 
attraction  and provides  a destination  for visitors  to 
the area. 
35.3 Due to the size and scale  of the Park,  and 
its importance  to the local economy , it was felt 
important  to specifically  identify  the site within  this 
chapter . Due to the nature  of the activities  at the 
park,  the predominant  land use is open  grassland, 
which  despite  the fences  and ancillary  animal 
houses,  generally  maintains  the openness  of the 
Green  Belt.  However , there  is a large  part of the 
site that is considered  to be 'Previously  Developed' 
(see plan)  and this is contained  primarily  around 
the rides  and leisure  element  of the park,  as well 
as the associated  car parking. 
35.4 The policy  outlines  a positive  approach  to development  within  this area identifying  that 
development  proposals  that support  and enhance  the park's  operations  as a leisure  and tourism 
destination  will be permitted.  The importance  of the park to the local economy  is also identified 
in Chapter  9  'A Good  Place  to Do Business',  and in Section  23, at Policy  DM.19:  Supporting 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 266 Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt 35 Major  Tourist  Attractions.  The potential  to open  up a passenger  halt on the Severn  Valley 
Railway  adjacent  to the Safari  Park is also being  explored.  (see Chapter  12 Transport  and 
Accessibility) 
Cursley  Distribution  Park 
Area:   9.98ha  gross  (approx.) 
35.5 Cursley  Distribution  Depot  is a former  Ministry  of Defence  storage  depot  which  is now 
in the ownership  of Hortons  Estates.  It contains  around  22,500sqm  of floorspace  currently  used 
for B2 and B8 uses  with ancillary  office accommodation.  The site is dominated  by 4 high-bay 
warehouses.  It is accessed  off the A442  from Cursley  Lane.   Many  of the buildings  now require 
redevelopment  to keep  the site attractive  to potential  business  occupiers.  As a Previously 
Developed  Site in the Green  Belt, the estate  will be able to benefit  from the flexibility  that the 
planning  policy  framework  provides,  and this will enable  the re-use  and redevelopment  of sites 
within  the curtilage,  subject  to proposals  being  appropriate  in terms  of impact  on the Green 
Belt.  
35.6 0.7 hectares  is allocated  for redevelopment  for employment  uses  under  Policy  SP.17. 
Wyre Forest  District 
267 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 35 Previously  Developed  Sites  in the Green  Belt Overview  of Allocated  Sites  in Chapter  36: Rural  Wyre Forest  (please  refer  to 
Policies  Map for further  information) 
1:28000 @ A1
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 23, 2022
SA.R7
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 268 Rural  Wyre Forest 36 Bill White  Nurseries,  Far Forest  (0.95ha)  20 dwellings  2026-31 
36.1 This site is located  just outside  of the 
settlement  boundary  at Far Forest.  It has no 
ecological  constraints  which  would  prevent  it being 
brought  forward  for development. 
Policy  SA.R1  - Bill White  Nurseries,  Far Forest 
The site is allocated  for residential  development  to meet  local needs  as demonstrated 
through  a parish  housing  needs  survey  and/or  the Housing  Register . The development 
should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. Development  should  be designed  to be in keeping  with the rural location 
ii. Development  should  be set back  from the main  road and be served  off a single  point 
of access  to retain  the linear  building  form of the settlement 
iii. A landscape  buffer should  be provided  to the front of the dwellings  to retain  the rural 
aspect 
iv. Boundary  hedges  should  be retained  and strengthened 
v. A tributary  of Dowles  Brook  borders  the site. Water treatment  must  ensure  that there 
are no negative  impacts  on the watercourse  which  flows  through  the Wyre Forest  SSSI 
further  downstream 
Wyre Forest  District 
269 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 36 Rural  Wyre Forest Reasoned  Justification 
36.2 Far Forest  is a well-served  village  with a primary  school,  shop,  public  house  and churches. 
Other  sites within  the settlement  boundary  have  been  considered  for allocation  but these  have 
all been  Greenfield  and ecological  constraints  would  mean  very limited  numbers  of dwellings 
could  be developed. 
Alton  Nurseries  Long  Bank  (1.29ha)  4 dwellings  plus employment  uses  2021-26 
36.3 This redundant  plant  nursery  site fronts 
directly  onto the A456  and the Bewdley  Business 
Park lies to the rear. There  are some  isolated 
dwellings  adjacent  to the site. This site is allocated 
for a mix of residential  and employment  uses. 
Planning  has been  approved  for 4 dwellings 
(18/0413/FULL). 
Policy  SA.R2  - Alton  Nurseries  Long  Bank   
i. The land is allocated  for up to 4 dwellings  along  the A456  frontage. 
ii. The rear part of the site is allocated  for employment  uses  to be developed  as part of 
the Bewdley  Business  Park 
iii. Existing  boundary  hedgerows  should  be enhanced  to provide  effective  screening. 
Additional  buffering  will be required  between  the housing  and employment  allocation 
Reasoned  Justification 
36.4 The nursery  business  has ceased  operations  and, despite  marketing  of the site, another 
operator  has not been  found.  Most  of the site will be absorbed  into the Bewdley  Business  Park 
site to the rear. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 270 Rural  Wyre Forest 36 Bellman’ s Cross  Shatterford   (0.79ha)  16 dwellings  2031-36 
36.5 This site is in the small  hamlet  of 
Shatterford  on the A442  Bridgnorth  Road.  The site 
has frontage  to both the A442  and to Arley  Lane. 
It consists  of scrubland  and also contains  a village 
hall. There  is a pub/restaurant  adjacent  to the site 
and a number  of dwellings.  It is shown  as allotment 
gardens  on the 1926  OS map.  Land  to the rear is 
thought  to have  been  a tile and brickworks  and 
there  is evidence  of past mining  activity  on the site. 
Former  miners’  cottages  adjoin  the site. The 
settlement  is washed  over by the Green  Belt. 
Policy  SA.R3  - Bellman's  Cross  Shatterford   
The site is allocated  for residential  development  to meet  local needs  as demonstrated 
through  a parish  housing  needs  survey  and/or  the Housing  Register . The development 
should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. Site access  should  only be taken  from Arley  Lane  using  the existing  access  to the 
village  hall 
ii. Proposals  should  consider  the viability  of providing  a small  replacement  meeting  facility 
as part of any residential  development  scheme 
iii. Development  should  front onto the main  A442  in order  to continue  the settlement 
building  pattern  of wayside  dwellings 
iv. Surface  water  discharge  must  not exceed  existing  levels.  SuDS  should  be provided 
on the site 
v. Scrub  and woodland  on the site should  be retained  as part of the development  where 
possible  and supplemented  with additional  planting  where  required 
Wyre Forest  District 
271 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 36 Rural  Wyre Forest Reasoned  Justification 
36.6 Upper  Arley  is a designated  Neighbourhood  Plan area.  A Parish  Housing  Needs  survey 
has been  undertaken  as part of the evidence  base  for the proposed  Neighbourhood  Plan.  This 
has shown  a small  housing  requirement.  As a result  of this, two sites are proposed  for allocation 
to serve  the village.  Shatterford  is a distinct  settlement  on the A442  at the junction  of the main 
lane serving  the riverside  village  of Upper  Arley . Although  Shatterford  no longer  has a shop,  it 
still retains  a village  hall and pub/restaurant  and is on a bus route  between  Kidderminster  and 
Bridgnorth.  A primary  school  is located  down  the lane in the village  of Upper  Arley . This area 
of scrubland  is available  for a small  residential  development  and it would  also provide  the 
opportunity  to enhance  the village  hall provision.  There  are known  surface  water  issues  in 
Beacon  Lane  where  it is thought  this site discharges  to. SuDS  should  be provided  on site to 
remedy  this situation 
Allotments,  Upper  Arley  (0.46ha)  5 dwellings  2026-31 
36.7 This area of run-down  allotments  lies in the 
centre  of the village  above  the River  Severn  and 
is in the Conservation  Area.  Upper  Arley  is an 
estate  village.  Arley  Estates  is the main  landowner . 
The allotments  are in an elevated  location  above 
the River  Severn.  The village  is washed  over by 
the Green  Belt. The site appears  to be abandoned 
and has grassed  over. 
Policy  SA.R4  - Allotments,  Upper  Arley 
This site is allocated  for residential  development  to meet  local needs  as demonstrated 
through  a parish  housing  needs  survey  and/or  the Housing  Register . The development 
should  meet  the following  requirements: 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 272 Rural  Wyre Forest 36 i. Development  should  be of restricted  height  to minimise  any impact  on the setting  of 
Listed  Buildings  and the Conservation  Area  as this site is in an elevated  position  and 
will extend  built development  up the hillside 
ii. Dwellings  should  use materials  and colours  to harmonise  with existing  buildings  in 
Conservation  Area 
iii. Proposals  will need  to demonstrate  how the Conservation  Area  is preserved  or 
enhanced.  Any public  benefit  would  need  to outweigh  any harm  caused 
iv. The site is surrounded  by mature  hedgerows  on the western  and northern  boundaries. 
The eastern  section  of the site consists  of woodland.  These  features  should  be buffered 
from development.  Future  management  of the woodland  should  be secured  as part of 
any development 
v. Lighting  should  be carefully  controlled  to restrict  spillage  into adjoining  sensitive  habitats 
vi. Surface  water  run-of f must  not be allowed  to enter  the ditch/stream  on the eastern 
boundary  untreated  as this flows  into the River  Severn 
Reasoned  Justification 
36.8 Potential  sites within  Upper  Arley  village  are very limited.  Once  ecological  factors  have 
been  taken  into consideration,  only around  20% of this site may be available  for development 
which  is likely  to limit numbers  to no more  than 5 dwellings.  Buffers around  the hedgerows  and 
woodland  will ensure  the retention  of rough  marginal  vegetation  for small  mammals  and birds. 
This will mean  that the bulk of any housing  need  will need  to be met outside  of the main  village 
at the Bellman’ s Cross  site. 
Wyre Forest  District 
273 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 36 Rural  Wyre Forest Red Lion  Car Park  (0.09ha)  2 dwellings  2021-26 
36.9 This site sits adjacent  to the County 
boundary . The group  of cottages  shown  on the 
plan are in Shropshire.  They  were  built on the site 
of the former  Red Lion public  house.  The adjacent 
car park is now allocated  for development.  The 
site is washed  over by the Green  Belt. The site is 
remote  from any service  but does  have  a bus stop 
nearby  serving  routes  between  Kidderminster  and 
Bridgnorth. 
Policy  SA.R5  - Red Lion  Car Park      
This land is allocated  for residential  development  and should  meet  the following 
requirements: 
i. The dwellings  should  be built side–on  to the A442 
ii. Access  is to be from the lane using  the existing  access 
iii. Dwellings  should  be designed  to match  with those  recently  built on the adjacent  site  
            
Reasoned  Justification 
36.10  This tiny site is the remaining  parcel  from the recent  redevelopment  on the adjacent 
site over the County  boundary . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 274 Rural  Wyre Forest 36 Land  at Lowe  Lane  Fairfield   (1.15ha) 
36.11 This land is leased  to the Parish  Council 
as allotments. 
Policy  SA.R6  - Land  at Lowe  Lane  Fairfield   
The site is safeguarded  as allotments.   
Reasoned  Justification 
36.12  This parcel  of land is leased  by Wolverley  and Cookley  Parish  Council  from the District 
Council  for allotments.  The allocation  will safeguard  this use. 
Wyre Forest  District 
275 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 36 Rural  Wyre Forest Rock  Tavern  Car Park,  Caunsall  (0.10ha)  3 dwellings  2021-26 
36.13  This site consists  of the former  car park 
to the Rock  Tavern  public  house  which  has been 
closed  for some  time.  Plans  have  been  approved 
to redevelop  the public  house  site for housing.  The 
former  car park site is in the centre  of the hamlet 
of Caunsall  which  is washed  over by the Green 
Belt. 
Policy  SA.R7  - Rock  Tavern  Car Park  Caunsall   
The site is allocated  for residential  development  to meet  local needs  as demonstrated 
through  a parish  housing  needs  survey  and/or  the Housing  Register . This development 
should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. The development  should  respect  the morphology , scale  and set back  of the existing 
historic  buildings 
ii. Soft landscaping  should  be implemented  to soften  the visual  impact  and aid green 
infrastructure  connectivity 
iii. Measures  must  be taken  to protect  the development  from surface  water  flooding  on 
Kinver  Lane  following  heavy  rainfall 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 276 Rural  Wyre Forest 36 Land  at Caunsall  Road,  Caunsall  (0.85ha)  4 dwellings  2021-26 
36.14  This greenfield  site in Caunsall  is used  as 
a horse  paddock.  It is proposed  to allow  frontage 
development  only along  Caunsall  Road. 
Policy  SA.R8  - Land  at Caunsall  Road  Caunsall   
This site is allocated  for residential  development  to meet  local needs  as demonstrated 
through  a parish  housing  needs  survey  and/or  the Housing  Register . The development 
should  meet  the following  requirements: 
i. Low density  development  of up to 4 dwellings  will be permitted   along  the road frontage 
in order  to respect  the wayside  character  of the settlement 
ii. Dwelling  design  should  respect  the setting  of Caunsall  Farm  and Caunsall  House  Farm 
(non-designated  heritage  assets) 
iii. No additional  surface  water  discharge  must  be allowed  to leave  the site 
Reasoned  Justification 
36.15  The two small  sites in Caunsall  will remain  washed  over by the Green  Belt. The new 
dwellings  must  be designed  to fit in with the character  and appearance  of the historic  settlement. 
There  are known  surface  water  flooding  issues  after heavy  rainfall  in the village  and measures 
must  be taken  to both protect  the new development  from flooding  and also not to exacerbate 
this issue  any further . 
Wyre Forest  District 
277 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 36 Rural  Wyre Forest Development  on Non-allocated  plots  in villages   
36.16  In villages  and other  rural settlements,  there  is the potential  to bring  forward  small  infill 
plots  for up to 6 dwellings  under  Policy  DM.2.  Amendments  have  been  made  to settlement 
boundaries  in a number  of villages  in Rock  Parish  to enable  small  sites to be brought  forward 
for development.  This will allow  for limited  development  to help retain  village  services.  Revised 
settlement  boundaries  are shown  on the Policies  Map.  Any development  will need  to be carefully 
designed  to reflect  the characteristics  of the settlement  and take account  of any existing 
constraints  such  as flooding,  drainage,  ecology  and landscape. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 278 Rural  Wyre Forest 36 37.1 The Infrastructure  Delivery  Plan (IDP),  which  is being  produced  alongside  the Local 
Plan,  reviews  and evaluates  the social,  environmental  and economic  infrastructure  that will be 
required  to support  the development  and growth  set out in the plan.  It is a living  document  that 
details  both the infrastructure  required  to support  the proposals  and development  sites in the 
plan,  the likely  delivery  partners  e.g. developers,  the district  and county  councils,  government 
agencies  and likely  funding  sources. 
37.2 The infrastructure  requirements  to support  the specific  policies  and allocations  in the 
Plan will be identified  within  the individual  site allocation  policies.  Further  infrastructure  may be 
required  as the detail  of schemes  is developed  and for windfall  development  proposals,  the 
infrastructure  requirements  and any contributions  required  will need  to be assessed  as schemes 
are drawn  up. Infrastructure  can be provided  in the following  ways: 
1. directly  by developers; 
2. by planning  contributions  through  Section  106 agreements  and/or  the Community 
Infrastructure  Levy  (CIL)  if implemented  by the Council 
37.3 Contributions  for infrastructure  can be for provisions  both off or on-site  and for new or 
improved  infrastructure. 
37.4 The following  indicators  will be used  to monitor  the Local  Plan.   
Table 37.0.1  Monitoring  Framework  for the Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan 
Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
Site allocations 5,520  dwellings  minimum 
(276 per annum) Number  of dwellings  to be 
delivered  over Plan 
Period 1. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 487 bedspaces  (24 per 
annum) C2 bedspaces  provided 
over Plan Period 2. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 29 hectares Amount  of employment 
land delivered  within  Plan 
Period 3. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 1231  dwellings Kidderminster  Town - net 
additional  dwellings 
delivered  2021-36 4. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Wyre Forest  District 
279 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 37 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
Site allocations 16 pitches Kidderminster  Town – 
gypsy  and traveller 
pitches  delivered 5. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 6 pitches Kidderminster  Town – 
travelling  showpeople 
pitches 6. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 21.82  hectares Kidderminster  Town – net 
additional  employment 
land delivered 7. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 1,400  dwellings Lea Castle  Village  -Net 
additional  dwellings 
delivered 8. SP.1Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 7.34 hectares Lea Castle  Village  - net 
additional  employment 
land delivered 9. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 1,439  dwellings Kidderminster  Eastern 
Extension  - net additional 
dwellings  delivered 10. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 1,155  dwellings Stourport-on-Severn  - net 
additional  dwellings 
delivered 11. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 4 pitches Stourport-on-Severn  -  
gypsy  and traveller 
pitches  delivered 12. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 0.56 hectares Stourport-on-Severn  - net 
additional  employment 
land delivered   13. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 280 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework 37 Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
Site allocations 230 dwellings Bewdley  - net additional 
dwellings  delivered 14. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 115 dwellings Rural  Wyre Forest  - net 
additional  dwellings 
delivered 15. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Site allocations 1.7 hectares Rural  Wyre Forest  - net 
additional  employment 
land delivered   16. SP.1 Spatial 
Development  Strategy 
2016-36 Development 
management  process 
Development   
management  process, 
master  planning  and other 
initiatives Monitor  to ensure 
brownfield  land is 
prioritised % of dwellings  completed 
on brownfield  sites 17. SP.2 Locating  New 
development 
Site allocations Annual  monitoring  of 
development  within  Green 
Belt to limit encroachment 
beyond  allocated  sites Hectarage  of 
development  in the Green 
Belt  18. SP.7 Strategic  Green 
Belt Review 
Development 
management  process 
Refer  to Strategic  Green 
Belt Review  document 
Site allocations Targets  as shown  in 
Table 8.0.1 Size / type of dwellings 
delivered 19. SP.9 Housing  Mix 
& Density 
Development 
management  process 
Development 
management  process Within  Kidderminster 
Town Centre  - 70 dph, 
adjacent  to town  centre 
and railway  station  - 50 
dph % of dwellings  delivered 
which  meet  target 
densities  set out in Policy 
8A 20. SP.9 Housing  Mix & 
Density 
Stourport-on-Severn  town 
centre  - >50 dph 
Bewdley  - 35 dph 
Site allocations 90 affordable  units  per 
annum  over plan period Number  of affordable 
homes  delivered   21. SP.10 Affordable 
Housing  Provision 
Development 
management  process 
Wyre Forest  District 
281 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 37 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
65% for rent 35% 
affordable  housing  for 
sale Indicative  tenure  split of 
affordable  homes 
Provision  of affordable 
units  within  major 
development  sites or in 
designated  rural areas 
(sites  >5 units) 25% of total units  to be 
affordable 
Development 
management  process Target  to be taken  from 
Self build  and custom 
build  register Number  of custom  and 
self-build  plots  approved 22. SP.12 Self and 
Custom  Housing 
Site allocations Requirement  for 1,642 
dwellings  over plan period Number  of dwellings 
delivered  which  are 
specifically  built for older 
people 23. SP.13 Housing  for 
Older  People 
Development 
management  process 20% of total housing 
requirement  over plan 
period  (applies  to major 
applications  only) Number  of dwellings 
provided  which  meet 
higher  access  standards 
of Part M of Building 
Regulations 
Site allocations 22 pitches  in plan period Number  of pitches 
required  for those  who do 
not meet  definition  as set 
out in PPTS 24. SP.14 Gypsy  and 
Traveller  Site Provision 
Development 
management  process 
Development 
management  process 100%  compliance Provision  of Health 
Impact  Assessments  as 
set out in Policy 25. SP.16 Health  and 
Wellbeing 
Local  Enterprise 
Partnership   Increasing  trend 
Increasing  trend Total number  of jobs 
Proportion  of working-age 
residents  in employment 26. SP.17 A Diverse 
Local  Economy 
North  Worcestershire 
Economic  Development 
and Regeneration Maintain  good  supply 
across  different  locations Amount  of employment 
land available,  by type 
and location Development 
Management  Process Decreasing  trend 
Employment  floorspace 
lost to other  uses Site allocations 
Development 
management  process Increasing  trend 
Decreasing  trend Amount  of new retail 
floorspace  developed  in 
town  centres 27. SP.18 Town Centre 
Development 
Kidderminster  BID 
Decreasing  trend 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 282 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework 37 Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
Amount  of retail 
floorspace  lost to other 
uses North  Worcestershire 
Economic  Development 
and Regeneration Increasing  trend 
% vacant  retail  premises 
within  Primary  Shopping 
Areas 
Amount  of new office 
floorspace  developed  in 
town  centres 
Operators Increasing  trend Number  of bedspaces 
developed  for tourism 28. SP.19 Sustainable 
Tourism 
Employers Increasing  trend 
Number  of tourism  related 
jobs 
Development 
management  process Decreasing  trend Number  of planning 
applications  refused  as a 
result  of poor quality 
design 29. SP.20 Quality  Design 
and Local  Distinctiveness 
Historic  England Decreasing  trend Number  of heritage 
assets  at risk 30. SP.21 Historic 
Environment 
Increasing  trend 
Number  of heritage 
assets  removed  from the 
HAR  register 
Natural  England 95% % of SSSIs  by area in 
'favourable'  condition  or 
'unfavourable  but 
recovering' 31. SP.23 Protecting  and 
Enhancing  Biodiversity 
WFDC 
Site allocations 
Amount  of semi-natural 
greenspace  (hectares) 
created  on allocated  sites Green  Infrastructure 
Strategy 
Development 
management  process Increasing  trend Number  of applications 
which  include 
enhancement  of the 
District's  waterways 32. SP.25 Regenerating 
the Waterways 
Site allocations Targets  to be agreed  as 
part of planning 
applications Bring  forward  necessary 
infrastructure  required  to 
deliver  Plan - new primary 33. SP.26 Strategic 
Infrastructure 
Development 
management  process schools  and village 
Wyre Forest  District 
283 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 37 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
centres  at Lea Castle  and 
Comberton  Road; 
improvements  to A450 Worcestershire  County 
Council 
Highways  England 
Developers Increasing  trend Length  of new cycle  paths 
provided  (km) 34. SP.27 Transport  and 
Accessibility 
Development 
management  process Increasing  trend 
N/A Length  of new 
recreational  footpaths 
provided  (km) Worcestershire  County 
Highways N/A 
Completions  of schemes 
identified  in 
Worcestershire  Local 
Transport  Plan as 
specified Bus Companies 
Network  Rail 
Worcestershire  County 
Council Provision  of new bus 
routes 
Number  of additional 
parking  spaces  provided 
at rail stations 
Site allocations 40% if >1Ha Provision  of GI on 
greenfield  sites >1Ha 35. SP.28 Green 
Infrastructure 
Development 
management  process 20% if 0.2-1Ha 
0.2-1Ha 
Site allocations Increasing  trend Number  of dwellings 
completed  which  meet 
water  efficiency  standards 36. SP.29 Water 
Conservation  and 
Efficiency Development 
management  process 
Development 
management  process 0 Number  of planning 
permissions  granted 
contrary  to Environment 
Agency  advice 37. SP.31 Flood  Risk 
Management 
Site allocations 80% % of new developments 
incorporating  SuDS 38. SP.32 Sustainable 
Drainage  Systems 
Development 
management  process 
Site allocations See Playing  Pitch 
Strategy  and Indoor  and 
Built Facilities  Strategy Number  of playing  pitch 
and indoor  built facilities 
completed 39. DM.6  Community 
Facilities 
Development 
management  process 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 284 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework 37 Delivery  Mechanism Target Indicator Plan  Policy 
Contextual  indicator Amount  of active  sports 
participation Sport  England 
MHCLG Contextual  indicator 
Change  in Health 
dimension  of the Index  of 
Multiple  Deprivation 
Wyre Forest  District 
285 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 37 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework Housing  Trajectory   for plan period  based  on Supply  at 1st April  2021 
 
 
Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10 Yr 11 Yr 12 Yr 13 Yr 14 Yr 15 Yr 16 Yr 17 Yr 18 Yr 19 Yr 20
2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36
Actual dwellings 
completed (net) 266 141 183 196 236
Projected completions 
(net) 618 519 635 746 465 530 475 453 210 280 290 126 110 110 110
Cumulative completions 266 407 590 786 1,022 1,640 2,159 2,794 3,540 4,005 4,535 5,010 5,463 5,673 5,953 6,243 6,369 6,479 6,589 6,699
Target 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276 276
Cumulative target 276 552 828 1,104 1,380 1,656 1,932 2,208 2,484 2,760 3,036 3,312 3,588 3,864 4,140 4,416 4,692 4,968 5,244 5,520
Monitor - difference 
between cumulative 
completions and 
cumulative target to date -10 -145 -238 -318 -358 -16 227 586 1,056 1,245 1,499 1,698 1,875 1,809 1,813 1,827 1,677 1,511 1,345 1,179
 
Number of years left in 
plan 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 00100200300400500600700800
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30
2030/31
2031/32
2032/33
2033/34
2034/35
2035/36
Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Yr 4 Yr 5 Yr 6 Yr 7 Yr 8 Yr 9 Yr 10 Yr 11 Yr 12 Yr 13 Yr 14 Yr 15 Yr 16 Yr 17 Yr 18 Yr 19 Yr 20Actual dwellings completed (net)
Projected completions (net)
Linear (Target)
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 286 Monitoring  and Implementation  Framework 37 a.1 The NPPF  (para  21) requires  Local  Plans  to make  explicit  which  policies  are strategic 
policies.  The list below  sets out the strategic  policies  in the Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan 
(2016-36).   
a.2 Part A of the Local  Plan is the strategic  element  of the document.  This section  of the plan 
contains  strategic  policies  from SP.1 through  to Policy  SP.37 
a.3  Part C of the Local  Plan is the site allocation  policies.  The list below  sets out which  of 
the site allocations  are strategic  policies. 
 Part A – Context  and Strategic  Policies 
Policy  SP.1 –Spatial  Development  Strategy  2016-2036 
Policy  SP.2 – Locating  New Development 
Policy  SP.3 – Kidderminster  town  as the strategic  centre  of the District 
Policy  SP.4 – Strategic  Allocation  Sites 
Policy  SP.5 – Role of Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley  as Market  Towns 
Policy  SP.6 – Role of the existing  villages  and rural areas 
Policy  SP.7 – Strategic  Green  Belt Review   
Policy  SP.8 – Reserved  Housing  Sites  in the Green  Belt 
Policy  SP.9 – Housing  Mix & Density 
Policy  SP.10 – Affordable  Housing  Provision 
Policy  SP.11 – Addressing  Rural  Housing  Needs   
Policy  SP.12 – Self Build  and Custom  Housing   
Policy  SP.13– Housing  for Older  People  and others  with special  housing  requirements 
Policy  SP.14 – Gypsy  and Traveller  Site Provision 
Policy  SP.15 – Site Provision  for Travelling  Showpeople 
Policy  SP.16 – Health  and Wellbeing 
Policy  SP.17 – A Diverse  Local  Economy 
Policy  SP.18 – Town Centre  Development 
Policy  SP.19 – Sustainable  Tourism 
Policy  SP.20 – Quality  Design  and Local  Distinctiveness 
Policy  SP.21 – Historic  Environment 
Policy  SP.22 – Landscape  Character 
Policy  SP.23 – Protecting  and Enhancing  Biodiversity 
Policy  SP.24 – Protecting  and Enhancing  Geodiversity 
Policy  SP.25 – Regenerating  the Waterways 
Policy  SP.26 – Strategic  Infrastructure 
Policy  SP.27 – Transport  and Accessibility  in Wyre Forest 
Policy  SP.28 – Green  Infrastructure 
Policy  SP.29 – Water Conservation  and Efficiency 
Policy  SP.30 – Sewerage  Systems  and Water Quality 
Policy  SP.31 – Flood  Risk Management 
Policy  SP.32 – Sustainable  Drainage  Systems  (SuDS) 
Policy  SP.33 – Pollution  and Land  Instability 
Policy  SP.34 – Minerals 
Wyre Forest  District 
287 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) a List of Strategic  Policies Policy  SP.35 – Waste 
Policy  SP.36 – Telecommunications  and Broadband 
Policy  SP.37 – Renewable  and Low Carbon  Energy 
Part C – Site Allocations 
Policy  SP.LCV1  – Lea Castle  Village  Vision 
Policy  SP.LCV2–  Lea Castle  Village  Principles  of Development 
Policy  SP.KEE1  – Land  at Husum  Way  
Policy  SP.KEE2  – Comberton  Lodge  Nursery   
Policy  SP.KEE3  – Land  at Comberton  Road  Overall  Vision 
Policy  SP.KEE4  – Land  at Comberton  Road  Principles  of Development    
Policy  SP.BLK1  – Station  Yard, Blakedown   
Policy  SP.BLK2  – Land  off Station  Drive,  Blakedown   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 288 List of Strategic  Policies a  Supplementary  Planning  Documents/Guidance   
b.1 The Local  Plan contains  details  of existing  SPD’ s that will be updated  following  adoption 
of the Local  Plan as well as proposed  SPD’ s that will also be undertaken  following  adoption. 
The Wyre Forest  Cycling  Strategy  will be superseded. 
b.2 New Supplementary  Planning  Documents: 
Health  & Wellbeing  SPD 
Green  Infrastructure  SPD 
Severn  Valley SPD 
b.3 Extant  SPD/SPG’ s until superseded: 
Planning  Obligations  SPD 
Affordable  Housing  SPD 
Design  Guidance  SPD 
Shop  Front  Design  Guide  within  the Historic  Environment 
Severn  Road  Development  Brief 
Public  Realm  Design  Guide  for Stourport  on Severn 
Churchfields  Masterplan  SPD 
Bridge  Street  Basin  Link Development  Brief SPD 
b.4  Superseded  Supplementary  Planning  Documents  / Guidance: 
Wyre Forest  Cycling  Strategy  (2002) 
Wyre Forest  District 
289 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) b Supplementary  Planning  Documents  (SPDs) Adopted  Core  Strategy  (2010)  - this is the strategic  level document  within  the District’ s 
Development  Plan.  It sets out the broad  locations  for delivering  housing  and other  major 
development  needs  in the District  such  as employment,  retail  and transport.  It guides  the site 
specific  policies  within  the Site Allocations  and Policies  Local  Plan and the Kidderminster  Central 
Area  Action  Plan. 
Affordable  Housing  - the District  Council  has adopted  the definition  of Affordable  Housing  as 
set out in the NPPF  (Annex  2 Glossary).       
Air Quality  Management  Area  (AQMA)  - areas  designated  by Wyre Forest  District  Council 
where  the level of pollutant  concentrations  in the atmosphere  results  in the air quality  not meeting 
the objectives  set out by central  government  in 2005. 
Biodiversity  - The variety  of different  types  of plant  and animal  life in a particular  region.   
Brownfield  Land   - see definition  of Previously  Developed  Land.   
Building  for a Healthy  Life 12  -  A measurement  of the design  quality  of new development 
now supported  by the Design  Council. 
Building  with Nature   - A framework  of quality  standards,  an assessment  and accreditation 
service,  and national  awards  recognising  the design  and delivery  of high quality  green 
infrastructure.   
Chalets  – these  are buildings,  also sometimes  referred  to as shacks,  which  are primarily 
constructed  of materials  of less than average  permanency  and used  for residential  occupation. 
Climate  Change  - long-term  changes  in temperature,  precipitation,  wind and all other  aspects 
of the Earth’ s climate.  Often  regarded  as a result  of human  activity  and fossil  fuel consumption. 
It is part of national  government  policy  that the planning  system  should  support  the transition 
to a low carbon  future. 
Community  Facilities  - facilities  which  provide  for the health,  welfare,  social,  educational, 
spiritual,  recreational,  leisure  and cultural  needs  of the community . 
Community  Infrastructure  Levy  (CIL)  - The Community  Infrastructure  Levy  is a planning 
charge,  introduced  by the Planning  Act 2008  as a tool for local authorities  in England  and Wales 
to help deliver  infrastructure  to support  the development  of their area.  Updated  rules  for the CIL 
have  now come  into force  from September  2019. 
Conservation  Area  - an area of special  architectural  or historic  interest,  the character  or 
appearance  of which  it is desirable  to preserve  or enhance. 
Custom  and Self Build  Housebuilding  - Housebuilding  which  involves  individuals  or groups 
of individual's  construction  new homes  from a builder , contractor  or package  company .  Some 
individuals  may engage  in building  work  themselves  and this is known  as self build.   
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 290 Glossary c Dark  Corridors  - Areas  of habitat  connecting  wildlife  populations  in order  to increase  biodiversity , 
specifically  in regard  to protect  foraging  and community  routes  for light intolerant  wildlife  in 
order  to avoid  fragmentation  of wildlife  corridors  by the effects  of strong  artificial  lighting.   
Designated  heritage  asset  – a World Heritage  Site, Scheduled  Monument,  Listed  Building, 
Protected  Wreck Site, Registered  Park and Garden,  Registered  Battlefield  or Conservation 
Area  designated  under  the relevant  legislation. 
Developer  Contributions  - developer  contributions  are often  required  for major  developments 
to make  them  acceptable  in planning  terms  eg. contributions  towards  educational  or open  space 
provision. 
Development  Plan  - the Development  Plan for the District  currently  comprises  of the Core 
Strategy , the Site Allocations  and Policies  Local  Plan and the Kidderminster  Central  Area  Action 
Plan.  The emerging  Local  Plan will replace  these  documents  and form part of the Development 
Plan once  adopted.  Neighbourhood  Plans  also form part of the Development  Plan when  they 
have  been  formally  'made'. 
Edge-of-Centre  - For retail  purposes,  a location  that is well-connected  to and within  easy 
walking  distance  (i.e up to 300 metres)  of the primary  shopping  area.  For all other  main  town 
centre  uses,  this is likely  to be within  300 metres  of a town  centre  boundary . In determining 
whether  a site falls within  the definition  of edge-of-centre,  account  should  be taken  of local 
circumstances.  For example,  local topography  will affect pedestrians’  perceptions  of easy walking 
distance  from the centre.  Other  considerations  include  barriers,  such  as crossing  major  roads 
and car parks,  the attractiveness  and perceived  safety  of the route  and the strength  of attraction 
and size of the town  centre.  A site will not be well-connected  to a centre  where  it is physically 
separated  from it by a barrier  such  as a major  road,  railway  line or river and there  is no existing 
or proposed  pedestrian  route  which  provides  safe and convenient  access  to the centre. 
Evidence  Base  - the information  and data gathered  by local authorities  to inform  the production 
of local plans. 
Functional  Economic  Market  Areas  (FEMAs)  - Economic  flows  often  overlap  local authority 
boundaries.  This means  that the functional  area over which  the local economy  and its key 
markets  operate  will not necessarily  adhere  to administrative  boundaries.   Instead,  key economic 
markets  broadly  correspond  to sub-regions  or city regions  - known  as functional  economic 
market  areas  (FEMAs).  There  is no universal  approach  to defining  FEMAs.  Ideally , FEMAs 
would  be defined  on the basis  of several  markets  or catchment  areas  which  best reflect  the 
drivers  of the local economy . 
Flood  Risk  Assessment  - an assessment  of the likelihood  of flooding  in a particular  area so 
that development  needs  and mitigation  measures  can be carefully  considered. 
Geodiversity  - the range  of rocks,  fossils,  minerals,  soils,  landforms  and natural  processes  that 
go to make  up the Earth's  landscape  and structure. 
Greater  Birmingham  and Solihull  Local  Enterprise  Partnership  (GBSLEP)  - Local  Enterprise 
Partnerships  are led by businesses  and local authorities  across  natural  economic  areas.  They 
provide  the vision,  knowledge  and strategic  leadership  required  to drive  sustainable  private 
Wyre Forest  District 
291 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) c Glossary sector  growth  and job creation  in their areas.  The GBSLEP  comprises  a partnership  including 
the local authorities  of Birmingham  City Council,  Bromsgrove  District  Council,  Cannock  Chase 
District  Council,  East Staffordshire  Borough  Council,  Lichfield  District  Council,  Redditch  Borough 
Council,  Solihull  Metropolitan  Borough  Council,  Tamworth  Borough  Council  and Wyre Forest 
District  Council. 
Green  Belt Land  - land which  is situated  between  urban  areas  on which  development  is restricted 
so as to prevent  urban  sprawl  by keeping  land permanently  open.  The essential  characteristics 
of Green  Belts  are their openness  and their permanence.  The Green  Belt serves  five purposes: 
1. to check  the unrestricted  sprawl  of large  built-up  areas;  2. to prevent  neighbouring  towns 
merging  into one another;  3. to assist  in safeguarding  the countryside  from encroachment;  4. 
to preserve  the setting  and special  character  of historic  towns;  and 5. to assist  in urban 
regeneration,  by encouraging  the recycling  of derelict  and other  urban  land.  Wyre Forest's 
Green  Belt is part of the wider  West Midlands  Green  Belt. 
Green  Infrastructure  - A network  of multi-functional  green  and blue spaces  and other  natural 
features,  urban  and rural,  which  is capable  of delivering  a wide range  of environmental,  economic, 
health  and wellbeing  benefits  for nature,  climate,  local and wider  communities  and prosperity .  
Greenfield  Land  - land which  has never  been  developed;  this includes  greenbelt  land and 
areas  of open  countryside,  as well as undeveloped  land within  urban  areas. 
Gypsy  and Traveller  Accommodation  Assessment  (GTAA) - the purpose  of this assessment 
is to provide  information  on the accommodation  needs  of Gypsies  and Travellers  in order  to 
ascertain  what  the appropriate  number , type and distribution  of additional  pitches  need  to be 
provided  within  the area. 
Habitats  Regulations  Assessment  (HRA)  -  tests  the impacts  of a proposal  on nature 
conservation  sites of European  importance,  and is a requirement  under  EU legislation  for land 
use plans  and projects. 
Hamlet   - A small  human  settlement  situated  in a rural location.   A hamlet  has no central  place 
of worship  such  as a church,  and no central  meeting  point,  such  as a village  church.   
Health  Impact  Assessment  (HSA)   - A tool used  to predict  the health  implications  of a planning 
proposal  on a population.   It ensures  that the effects  of development  on both health  and health 
inequalities  are considered  and addressed  during  the planning  process.   
Heritage  Asset  -a building,  monument,  site, place,  area or landscape  identified  as having  a 
degree  of significance  meriting  consideration  in planning  decisions,  because  of its heritage 
interest. 
Housing  and Employment  Land  Availability  Assessment  (HELAA)  - The HELAA  is an 
evidence  base  document  that identifies  sites that may have  future  development  potential  for 
housing  or employment  uses.  It does  not allocate  sites to be developed. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 292 Glossary c Housing  Market  Area  - an area in which  households  search  for housing.  These  areas  cut 
across  local authority  boundaries  and can be defined  based  on a series  of indicators  comprising   
house  prices,  migration  and search  patterns  and contextual  data including  travel-to-work  areas, 
retail  and school  catchments.   
Infrastructure  - basic  services  necessary  for development  to take place;  for example,  roads, 
electricity , sewerage,  water , education  and health  facilities. 
Kidderminster  Central  Area  Action  Plan  (KCAAP)  - Adopted  plan targeted  specifically  to 
regenerating  the central  area of Kidderminster . 
Landscape  Character  Assessment  (LCA)  - an assessment  of landscape  character  which  is 
defined  as ‘a distinct,  recognisable,  and consistent  pattern  of elements  in the landscape  which 
makes  one landscape  different  from another'. 
Listed  Building  - a building  of special  architectural  or historic  interest.  Listed  buildings  are 
graded  I, II* or II, with grade  I being  the highest.  Listing  includes  the interior  as well as the 
exterior  of the building  and any buildings  or permanent  structures  within  its curtilage. 
Live/W ork - is defined  as property  that is specifically  designed  for dual use, combining  both 
residential  and employment  space. 
Local  Development  Order  (LDO)  - A Local  Development  Order  (LDO)  is a simple  tool to allow 
a Local  Planning  Authority  to introduce  new permitted  development  rights.  They  are flexible 
and consistent  with local determination. 
Local  Development  Scheme  (LDS)  - a three  year timetable  setting  out the type of Development 
Plans  to be produced  and the key milestones  for their development. 
Local  Heritage  List - the Local  Heritage  List identifies  those  heritage  assets  that are not 
protected  by statutory  designations.  Their  local interest  could  be related  to the social  and 
economic  history  of the area as well as  individuals  of local importance.  The Local  Heritage  List 
is not restricted  to buildings.  It may comprise  sites,  places  or areas  such  as village  greens  or 
ponds. 
Local  Housing  Needs  - The number  of homes  identified  as being  needed:   
At overall  District  level,  the LHN is the number  of homes  identified  as being  needed  through 
the application  of the standard  method  set out in national  planning  guidance. 
At parish  level,  local housing  needs  are established  through  housing  needs  surveys  which 
are undertaken  in agreement  and partnership  with the relevant  Town or Parish  Council.   
Local  Plans  (LPs)  - the collective  term given  to all statutory  documents  that form the 
Development  Plan for the District.  At present,  these  comprise  of the Core  Strategy , Site 
Allocations  and Policies,  Kidderminster  Central  Area  Action  Plan and a Policies  Map. 
Major  Developments  - major  developments  include; 
Wyre Forest  District 
293 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) c Glossary Residential  development  compromising  at least  10 dwellings  or a site area of at least 
0.5 hectare  if the number  of dwellings  is not specified. 
For non-residential  development  where  the floor space  to be built is greater  than 1,000 
square  metres  or the site area is at least  1 hectare  in size. 
National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF)  - the document  which  sets out the Governments 
planning  policies  for England  and how these  are expected  to be applied.  The revised  NPPF 
was published  by the Ministry  of Housing,  Communities  and Local  Government  in July 2021.   
National  Planning  Practice  Guidance  (NPPG)  -Web based  resource  of planning  practice 
guidance,  launched  and maintained  by Department  for Communities  and Local  Government 
(DCLG),  to enable  practitioners  to implement  the content  of the NPPF .  The NPPG  is currently 
being  updated  to reflect  the changes  from the revised  NPPF .  
Natural  England  - Natural  England  works  for people,  places  and nature  to conserve  and 
enhance  biodiversity , landscapes  and wildlife  in rural,  urban,  coastal  and marine  areas. 
Natural  Spaces   - Natural  Spaces  - Sites  of biodiversity  and conservation  importance.  This 
is outlined  within  the 2006  Natural  Environment  and Rural  Communities  (NERC)  Act. Section 
41 sets out that the Secretary  of State  is obliged  to publish  a list of habitats  and species  which 
are of principal  importance  for the conservation  of biodiversity  in England.  The 
Worcestershire  Biodiversity  Action  Plan produced  by Worcestershire  Biodiversity  Partnership 
outlines  the habitats  and species  of conservation  priority  within  Worcestershire  and Wyre Forest 
District.  Semi  natural  habitats  are also of importance  to Natural  Space  sites where  they act as 
habitat  corridors  and link designated  sites of nature  conservation  value  and priority  habitats 
together  to the wider  ecological  network. 
Neighbourhood  Development  Plans  -  Neighbourhood  Development  Plans  allow  local people 
to come  together  to decide  how they want  their area to develop.  They  can be developed  by 
Town and Parish  Councils  or by Neighbourhood  Forums  outside  of the Parished  areas. 
Open  Space  - all space  of public  value,  which  can offer opportunities  for sport  and recreation 
or can also act as a visual  amenity  and a haven  for wildlife.  Areas  of open  space  include  public 
landscaped  areas,  playing  fields,  parks  and play areas,  and also areas  of water  such  as rivers, 
canals,  lakes  and reservoirs. 
Out-of-Centre  - A location  which  is not in or on the edge-of-centre  but not necessarily  outside 
the urban  area.  Planning  Obligations  Legally  enforceable  agreements  between  a planning 
authority  and a developer , or undertakings  offered  unilaterally  by a developer , which  ensure 
that necessary  planning  mitigating  works  related  to development,  are undertaken;  these  are 
sometimes  called  section  106 agreements. 
Planning  Obligations  - Legally  enforceable  agreements  between  a planning  authority  and a 
developer , or undertakings  offered  unilaterally  by a developer , which  ensure  that necessary 
planning  mitigating  works  related  to development,  are undertaken;  these  are sometimes 
called  section  106 agreements. 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 294 Glossary c Previously  Developed  Land  (PDL)  - land which  is, or was occupied  by a permanent  structure, 
including  the curtilage  of the developed  land (although  it should  not be assumed  that the whole 
of the curtilage  should  be developed)  and any associated  fixed  surface  infrastructure. 
Reserved  Housing  Sites  - land which  lies between  the urban  area and the Green  Belt which 
is identified  to meet  longer  term development  needs  stretching  well beyond  the plan period. 
Safeguarded  land is not allocated  for development  at the present  time and planning  permission 
should  only be granted  for such  land following  a Plan review  which  proposes  development.  Until 
areas  of safeguarded  land are identified  for development,  Green  Belt policies  apply  to them. 
Formerly  known  as Areas  of Development  Restraint  (ADR). 
ReW yre Initiative  / Regeneration  Prospectus  - the prospectus  aims to highlight  Kidderminster ’s 
challenges  and opportunities  in order  to attract  support  and investment  into the town. 
Section  106 Agreement  - A legal  agreement  between  developers  and a local planning  authority 
made  in accordance  with Section  106 (s106)  of the 1991  Planning  Act, usually  to secure  benefits 
for local residents  without  which  a planning  application  would  be refused  (see also Planning 
Obligations).Scheduled  Monument  - a 'nationally  important'  archaeological  site or historic 
building,  given  protection  against  unauthorised  change. 
Significance  (for heritage  policy)  – The value  of a heritage  asset  to this and future  generations 
because  of its heritage  interest.  That interest  may be archaeological,  architectural,  artistic  or 
historic.  Significance  derives  not only from a heritage  asset’ s physical  presence,  but also from 
its setting. 
Site Allocations  and Policies  Local  Plan  - District  wide adopted  plan that allocates  and 
designates  areas  of land for particular  uses,  most  notably  land to deliver  housing  but also for 
other  major  development  needs  such  as employment,  recreation,  open  space  and community 
uses. 
Site of Special  Scientific  Interest  (SSSI)  - a specifically  defined  area within  which  protection 
is afforded  to ecological  or geological  features.  Sites  are officially  notified  by Natural  England. 
Social  Rented  - Housing  available  to rent at below  market  levels.  The government  subsidies 
local authorities  and registered  social  landlords  in order  to meet  affordable  housing  needs. 
Strategic  Centres  - there  are 25 town  centres  in the West Midlands  region  that are defined   in 
the former  Regional  Spatial  Strategy  as ‘Strategic  Centres’. 
Strategic  Flood  Risk  Assessment  (SFRA)  - collates  information  on all known  sources  of 
flooding  that may affect existing  or future  development  within  the District.  The SFRA  identifies 
and maps  areas  that have  a ‘low’,  ‘medium’  and ‘high’  probability  of flooding  within  the Wyre 
Forest. 
Supplementary  Planning  Documents  (SPDs)  - provide  additional  information  to guide  and 
support  the Development  Plan. 
Wyre Forest  District 
295 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) c Glossary Sustainability  Appraisal  (SA) - the purpose  of SA is to ensure  that the Development  Plan and 
associated  Supplementary  Planning  Documents  (SPDs)  conform  to the Government  principles 
of Sustainable  Development. 
Sustainable  Development  - Development  that meets  the needs  of the present  without 
compromising  the ability  of future  generations  to meet  their own needs.  The NPPF  sets out a 
definition  of sustainable  development  (paragraphs  7 - 14) and sets how it is to be identified 
and delivered. 
Sustainable  Drainage  Systems  (SUDS)  - an environmentally  friendly  way of dealing  with 
surface  water  run-of f which  increases  the time taken  for surface  water  to reach  watercourses, 
thereby  reducing  flash  flooding. 
Water Cycle  Strategy  - this assesses  the constraints  and requirements  that may arise  from 
the scale  of the proposed  development  on the water  infrastructure  in the District. 
West Midlands  Green  Belt - The Wyre Forest  Green  Belt Land  falls within  the wider  West 
Midlands  Green  Belt. This is within  the West Midlands,  Shropshire,  Staffordshire,  Warwickshire 
and Worcestershire  local authorities. 
Wildlife  Corridor  - Areas  of habitat  connecting  wildlife  populations  in order  to make  landscapes 
more  permeable  and to increase  biodiversity . 
Windfall  Site - a site not specifically  allocated  for development  in a development  plan,  but which 
unexpectedly  becomes  available  for development  during  the lifetime  of a plan.  Most  windfall 
sites are for housing. 
Worcestershire  Local  Enterprise  Partnership  - Worcestershire  LEP is led by private  sector 
businesses  in partnership  with the public  sector  – comprising  Worcestershire  County  Council 
and the six District  councils  of Worcester  City, Bromsgrove,  Redditch,  Malvern  Hills,  Wyre Forest 
and Wychavon. 
Worcestershire  Local  Transport  Plan  - sets out Worcestershire’ s transport  strategy , as well 
as identifying  major  long-term  transportation  pressures  on the County . 
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 296 Glossary c The following  maps  are included  within  this Appendix: 
Settlement  boundaries  for: Blakedown;  Bliss  Gate;  Callow  Hill; Clows  Top; Cookley;  Far 
Forest;  Rock;  Wilden  and; Wolverley . 
Retail  areas  for Kidderminster , Stourport-on-Severn  and Bewdley . 
The Policies  Map is available  separately .  
Wyre Forest  District 
297 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps Blakedown  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:2000 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 298 Maps d Bliss  Gate  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1250 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
299 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps Callow  Hill Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:2000 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 300 Maps d Clows  Top Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1250 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
301 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps Cookley  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1500 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 302 Maps d Far Forest  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1250 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
303 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps Rock  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1250 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 304 Maps d Wilden  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1250 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
305 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps Wolverley  Settlement  Boundary 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Thursday, March 17, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1700 @ A1
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 306 Maps d Kidderminster  Retail 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 16, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:2500 @ A3
Wyre Forest  District 
307 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps Stourport-on-Severn  Retail 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 16, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:2000 @ A3
Wyre Forest  District 
Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) 308 Maps d Bewdley  Retail 
Crown Copyright 100018317 Wednesday, March 16, 2022
Elaine
Wilcox
1:1250 @ A3
  
Wyre Forest  District 
309 Wyre Forest  District  Local  Plan (2016-2036) d Maps 